Applied Intelligence (2024) 54:6175–6197
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-024-05483-1

Study regarding the influence of a student’s personality and an LMS
usage profile on learning performance using machine learning
techniques
Juan Ramón Rico-Juan1 · Cristina Cachero1 · Hermenegilda Macià2
Accepted: 20 April 2024 / Published online: 8 May 2024
© The Author(s) 2024

Abstract
Academic performance (AP) is crucial for lifelong success. Unfortunately, many students fail to meet expected academic
benchmarks, leading to altered career paths or university dropouts. This issue is particularly pronounced in the early stages of
higher education, highlighting the need for the instructors of these foundational courses to have access to simple yet effective
tools for the early identification of students at high risk of academic failure. In this study, we propose a streamlined conceptual
model inspired by the Model of Human Behavior (MHB) to which we have incorporated two dimensions: capacity and
willingness. These dimensions are assessed through the definition of three variables: Prior Academic Performance (PAP),
Personality and Academic Engagement, whose measurements can easily be obtained by the instructors. Furthermore, we
outline a Machine Learning (ML) process that higher education instructors can use to create their own tailored models
in order to predict AP and identify risk groups with high levels of transparency and interpretability. The application of our
approach to a sample of 322 Spanish undergraduates studying two mathematical subjects at a Spanish university demonstrates
its potential to detect failure early in the semester with a precision that is comparable with that of more complex models found
in literature. Our tailored model identified that capacity was the primary predictor of AP, with a gain-to-baseline improvement
of 21%, and the willingness variables increasing this to 27%. This approach is consistent over time. Implications for instructors
are discussed and an open prediction and analysis tool is developed.
Keywords Student dropout · Academic performance · Observational study · eXplainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) ·
Machine Learning (ML)

1 Introduction
Academic performance (AP) is widely recognized as being
crucial for lifelong success. Students who excel academically
tend to enjoy better health, overall well-being, and higher

B Hermenegilda Macià

hermenegilda.macia@uclm.es
Juan Ramón Rico-Juan
juanramonrico@ua.es
Cristina Cachero
ccachero@dlsi.ua.es

1

Departament of Software and Computing Systems, University
of Alicante, 03690 Alicante, Spain

2

Higher Technical School of Computer Engineering of
Albacete, Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha,, Campus
Universitario s/n 02071 Albacete, Spain

salaries [62]. Moreover, AP is a proven critical indicator of
university dropout rates [63, 79], thus posing a significant
challenge for modern economies. The demands for individuals with advanced skills is escalating in order to satisfy labor
market requirements and foster productive and equitable
environments [88], and high dropout rates are a formidable
barrier to these objectives. At a worldwide level, a mere 38%
of students enrolled on Bachelor’s degree programs complete their studies within the designated time frame [62].
Although the situation in Spain is less dire, it is still troubling,
with 27.4% of students at public universities discontinuing
their studies in order to either change majors (12.5%) or
exit the Spanish university system entirely (14.9%). These
percentages rise to 37.1% in the fields of Engineering and
Architecture, with 18.3% leaving the Spanish university system entirely) [11]. It is particularly noteworthy that the
highest dropout rates occur in the first year of study. These

123

6176

statistics fully justify the scientific community’s considerable interest in two key areas: identifying the factors that
can predict academic failure, and developing straightforward
strategies based on these factors that will promote the development of flexible and interpretable models that are adaptable
to various real-world educational environments [66]. These
models should additionally enable the early identification of
at-risk student groups so as to facilitate the timely execution
of academic interventions [66].
With regard to the factors linked to academic performance,
various authors argue that predicting academic dropout
necessitates a blend of sociodemographic, economic and academic elements [4, 13, 53, 63, 79]. Achieving this requires
cooperation between higher education instructors and institutional data system administrators, a process that can be
quite burdensome for instructors.
Some researchers therefore advocate predicting academic
performance by evaluating factors that are more readily
accessible to academic instructors. The relevant literature
emphasizes that cognitive factors such as cognitive abilities and self-regulated learning strategies are crucial [38,
51, 69, 81]. However, recent studies suggest that although
cognitive factors account for approximately 25% of the variance in academic performance, the relationship between
cognitive abilities and academic success is also shaped by
various non-cognitive factors [69]. These include personality,
emotional intelligence, motivation, academic engagement,
self-efficacy, and grit [1, 3, 6, 28, 46, 58, 72, 92, 93]. A significant challenge regarding some methods in this category
is their great dependence on subjective or reported measures [65], along with the use of extensive questionnaires [12,
23], which may hamper the reliability of the measurements.
Moreover, certain proposed models incorporate a wide range
of variables [74], which not only complicates the measurement process but also heightens the risk of overfitting,
particularly when combined with machine learning techniques and relatively small sample sizes (around 100) [40].
With regard to facilitating streamlined processes for the
early identification of student groups that are at risk, the use
of machine learning (ML) techniques to tackle academic
underperformance by considering both cognitive and noncognitive factors has undergone an increase in popularity in
recent years. This trend is attributed to the acknowledgment
that the connection between these factors and academic performance (AP) is inherently non-linear [69]. The application
of ML has consequently advanced educational research by
providing considerable insights into these complex interactions. However, integrating ML models into the university
setting can pose significant challenges for instructors (see
e.g. [19]), who are required to navigate the application of relatively advanced ML techniques, often within the confines
of restricted knowledge, time and resources.

123

J. R. Rico-Juan et al.

The aim of this paper is twofold. Firstly, we introduce
and showcase the potential effectiveness of a concise model
that incorporates three key variables: previous academic performance, personality and academic engagement, in order
to predict academic success. These variables cover both the
cognitive and non-cognitive perspectives, which are, according to current literature, considered essential. The related
eight measures (or nine, should the instructor aim to develop
a model that is applicable to multiple subjects simultaneously) can be swiftly gathered (within 30 minutes) through
the use of a concise questionnaire and a brief examination
of the Learning Management System (LMS) log files related
to the course. Secondly, we present a comprehensive ML
process that will allow instructors to craft their personalized
versions of the model, adapted to their unique educational
contexts. The straightforwardness of the model, along with a
detailed step-by-step guide to the ML process that includes
explanatory techniques and cohort analysis, facilitates the
detection of at-risk students and the derivation of insightful
conclusions, even for instructors with minimal knowledge
of ML and in scenarios involving small groups and limited
resources. Furthermore, the clarity and interpretability of the
resulting ML models equip educators with the means to thoroughly comprehend and trust the predictions generated.
In order to demonstrate the viability of our method, we
have implemented it on two mathematical courses at a Spanish university. The findings reveal that, in this setting, our
approach successfully identified at-risk groups in both subjects just one month into the semester. Equipped with this
information, the educators involved in this case study now
have a tool that enables them to implement targeted and early
interventions so as to reduce the risk of academic failure on
these courses.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 introduces the conceptual model and outlines its
three key constructs, while Section 3 provides a review of
key empirical studies examining the effects of the model
constructs on academic performance and the methodologies
employed to evaluate these effects. Section 4 describes the
ML process that instructors must follow so as to develop
their own predictive models, and Section 5 describes the case
study developed in order to illustrate the proposed approach.
Section 6 provides an in-depth explanation of the implementation of the data collection phase of the ML process, while
Section 7 illustrates the steps involved in identifying the optimal algorithm and ML model for any given context. Section 8
explains how to apply explainability techniques in order to
improve the interpretability of the results. Section 9 explores
the implications of our contributions and findings for the contemporary educational context, along with their limitations,
and finally, Section 10 encapsulates the primary conclusions
and proposes avenues for future research.

Study regarding the influence of a student’s personality and an LMS usage profile...

2 Conceptual framework
In order to empirically evaluate how differences in students’
cognitive and non-cognitive profiles can assist in predicting academic performance early in the semester, we adopted
the Model of Human Performance (MHP) [16]. This model
categorizes the various individual differences that could
potentially impact on work productivity into two different dimensions. The first dimension, Capacity, encompasses
variables including work experience, educational level and
cognitive abilities, while the second dimension, Willingness,
includes psychological and emotional traits such as motivation, academic engagement and personality. The model also
incorporates a third dimension, Opportunity, which refers to
the contextual factors surrounding the work, such as materials, tools and working conditions. The hypothesis driving
this research is that the same three factors that, according to
the MHP, impact on productivity in work settings are also
bound to affect academic productivity. This hypothesis is
partly supported by the presence of these same components,
albeit structured and named differently, in other theories that
are frequently used for the study of academic performance,
such as the theory of Self-Regulated Learning (SRL) [64].
We have identified a minimum set of variables for each
dimension that, based on existing literature, show promise
as regards predicting academic performance at the university level [41, 69, 74] while simultaneously being easy for
instructors at university institutions such as ours to collect.
The resulting conceptual model is depicted in Fig. 1, in which

6177

the focus is on the relationship between individual differences
- Capacity and Willingness - and Performance. The Capacity dimension is represented by a single component, prior
academic performance (PAP), while the Willingness dimension includes two subcomponents: personality and academic
engagement. Opportunity, which in the educational context
refers to external factors that enable or prevent a student
from achieving academic success effectively, is presumed
to impact equally on all students within a specific educational setting. It has consequently not been integrated into
the model as a dimension with which to explain individual
differences in academic performance.
Each of the theoretical constructs involved in this conceptual model is explored in greater depth below.

2.1 Capacity
According to Reed and Jensen [73], cognitive abilities can
be defined as “the skills and processes of the mind necessary
to perform a task.” Cognitive skills assist in the process of
information gathering, analysis, understanding, processing,
and storing in memory for later use in any activity.
There are four contemporary models of intelligence that
have received significant attention in the literature related
to assessing cognitive abilities [68]: the theory of Multiple Intelligences (MI), the theory of the three strata or the
Cattell-Horn-Carroll (CHC) theory, the Successful Intelligence Theory (SIT), and the Verbal-Perceptual Rotation
Theory (VPRT). All of these theories begin with a general

Fig. 1 Conceptual model:
overview

123

6178

concept of intelligence, which is understood to be “the potential that facilitates adaptation, learning, planning, problemsolving, abstract reasoning, decision making, understanding
of complex ideas, and the creativity of individuals, which
has a biological substrate and is not exclusive to the human
species” [39]. While all of these theories have associated
measurement instruments, their comprehensiveness makes
their application challenging in the university context.
Furthermore, the Spanish University entrance system is
based on a composite score that reflects PAP. This score is
a combination of the student’s high school grade point average (GPA) and the college admission test score. The PAP
score serves as a gatekeeper for Spanish university admissions and is acknowledged to reflect the student’s cognitive
abilities beyond that which is captured by an intelligence
test, owing to the self-regulatory competencies that influence
the high school GPA [69]. Moreover, previous studies have
demonstrated that PAP is the strongest predictor of university
GPA [69, 74]. In this study we, therefore, use PAP as a proxy
for capacity (see Fig. 1).

2.2 Personality
The American Psychological Association (APA) defines personality as “individual differences in characteristic patterns
of thinking, feeling, and behaving”. The research community
widely accepts that personality traits are useful for predicting
intention, achievement and behavior [9].
The two most representative personality theories are,
according to personality psychologists [5, 35], the Big Five
(BF) personality model [49] and Eysenck’s Hierarchical
Three Factor model (PEN) [33]. Some studies comparing
both have concluded that the BF model is more comprehensive and has better measurement reliability than the PEN
model [7], thus making it the dominant model in personality
research [26, 29, 83] and education [14, 20, 83].
The objective of the BF model is to classify all significant
sources of individual personality differences, and it includes
five factors: Neuroticism (N), Extraversion (E), Agreeableness (A), Consciousness (C), and Openness to experience
(O). N reflects the individual’s tendency to experience distress and the cognitive and behavioral styles that result from
this. High N scorers experience higher levels of nervous tension, guilt, depression, self-consciousness, frustration, and
ineffective coping. E reflects individual differences in positive emotionality, and high E scorers are energetic, optimistic,
cheerful, enthusiastic, talkative, dominant, warm, and sociable, while low E scorers are more reserved, quiet, shy, silent,
withdrawn, and retiring. A reflects individual differences in
friendliness, with high A scorers being modest, caring, nurturing, emotionally supportive, altruistic, and trusting, while
low A scorers tend to be more self-centered, spiteful, hostile,

123

J. R. Rico-Juan et al.

jealous, and indifferent to others. C reflects individual differences in the will to achieve and impulsiveness, with high C
scorers being neat, diligent, thorough, achievement-oriented,
well-organized, and governed by conscience, while low C
scorers are not. Finally, O refers to individual differences
in intellect traits: high O scorers have aesthetic sensitivity,
imagination, curiosity, intellectual interest, a need for variety,
unconventional values, perceptiveness, and openness to values, sensations, feelings, and fantasies. However, individuals
that attain low scores for the O factor tend to favor conservative values, repress anxiety, and judge in conventional terms.
These five components are illustrated in Fig. 1.

2.3 Academic engagement
Academic engagement is characterized by a favorable,
persistent, and comprehensive attitude toward work [78].
Research has consistently shown a positive correlation
between academic engagement and academic achievement
[69, 77].
With regard to assessing academic engagement, the
increasing use of information and computing technologies
(ICT) in education, and particularly the integration of Learning Management Systems (LMS), provides instructors with
a rich ecosystem of data that can provide a clear picture of the
quantity and quality of interaction both inside and outside the
classroom, along with a sense of the students’ commitment
to the subject. System usage has, in particular, been shown to
be significantly related to academic performance, explaining
around 20% of the variance in students’ final grades [36].
Of the myriad of LMSs available on the market, the
Spanish university system employs Moodle, an open-source
e-learning environment that allows instructors to gather a
range of metrics with which to assess how students approach
the course in blended settings. Some examples of these metrics include total time online, total sessions (accesses to
the platform), average inter-session interval, the proportion
of time spent on learning resources (relative to total time
online), the proportion of learning resources accessed, the
proportion of activities completed, number of interventions
in fora, and number of messages sent to the facilitator [30].
Although any of these measures (or a combination of
them) could have been used to provide a picture of student
engagement, given our objective of producing a parsimonious model, we opted for a single variable with which to
reflect LMS use. The choice of this variable was guided
by the following criteria: (a) The variable had to be easy
to collect (standardized by subject) in order to preserve the
simplicity of the data gathering process; (b) the variable
needed to be sufficiently broad to be applicable to various
subjects and instructors, and (c) the variable had to represent platform usage, irrespective of the specific purpose. For

Study regarding the influence of a student’s personality and an LMS usage profile...

example, some courses may employ active learning methods
such as flipped classrooms, necessitating significant access
to resources at home without requiring extended interaction
with the platform (in terms of time). Conversely, courses
that demand student engagement in forums, wikis, or quizzes
through the LMS can result in greater platform usage both
within and outside the classroom. These two scenarios could
yield very different time metrics, although not necessarily
divergent counts of platform accesses since they are normalized by subject. We consider this to be an indicator
of academic engagement that is less dependent on specific
teaching strategies than are other variables, which makes
it more adaptable to changes in the academic environment.
Moreover, the dynamic nature of academic engagement suggests the suitability of measuring this number of accesses at
different time points. Given the 4-month format of Spanish
university courses, we have chosen four moments: T1 (week
4), T2 (week 8), T3 (week 12), and T4 (week 15). All of this
is reflected in Fig. 1.

3 Related work
3.1 Key factors influencing academic performance:
insights from meta-analyses
As mentioned previously, given the acknowledged significance of AP for lifelong success and socio-economic growth,
extensive research has been conducted into the variables that
may affect it, including several meta-analyses. This section
reviews frequently cited studies that examine the effects of
the three factors incorporated into the conceptual model illustrated in Fig. 1 (PAP, personality, and academic engagement)
on AP.
In terms of capability, a meta-analysis by [74] identified
a moderate correlation between high school GPA and American College Testing (ACT). Likewise, the findings of [69]
indicated that PAP serves as the most significant predictor
of university GPA, a conclusion further supported by other
studies [27, 44, 87].
With respect to personality, a meta-analysis by [70] on the
Five Factor model of personality and academic performance
highlighted conscientiousness (one of the Big Five traits)
as a key predictor of tertiary GPA, even after taking high
school GPA into consideration. This conclusion is corroborated by [74]. Vedel [86] conducted another meta-analysis,
reinforcing the view that conscientiousness is the strongest
personality predictor of GPA, with a weighted summary
effect of .26. The meta-analysis carried out by [69] similarly recognizes conscientiousness, academic self-efficacy
and non-cognitive SRL strategies as powerful predictors of
variance in AP.

6179

A more recent meta-analysis was conducted by [60] in
order to examine the combined impact of cognitive abilities
and personality. This analyzed 267 independent samples (N
= 413,074) from 228 unique studies. The results indicated
that the combined effect of cognitive ability and personality traits can account for 27.8% of the variance in academic
performance. Cognitive ability was found to be the most significant predictor, with a relative importance of 64%, while
conscientiousness had a relative importance of 28%.
Finally, with regard to academic engagement, data from
Learning Management Systems (LMS) have been shown to
effectively predict student academic performance with high
accuracy. Specifically, metrics such as the frequency and timing of Moodle interactions, along with the types of activities
students participate in on Moodle, can be extracted from
Moodle logs. These metrics have been identified as being
strong predictors of academic performance, accounting for
approximately 20% of the variance in student’s final grades
[2, 32, 36, 54, 71].
It is noteworthy that the three factors included in our
conceptual framework (capacity, personality, and academic
engagement) appear to maintain their predictive power over
academic outcomes across years [42, 69], and also seem to
be valid for different cultures [75].

3.2 Academic performance analysis techniques:
from traditional statistics to machine learning
With regard to the techniques used to analyze the impact of
these factors on academic performance, traditional statistical methods such as correlation analyses and simple/multiple
linear regression models have been the norm for many years
[36, 79]. However, the emergence of LMSs and their associated data, along with the development of advanced ML
techniques, have driven the research community to broaden
their understanding of the learning environment by exploring and leveraging a wide range of educational data through
the use of these innovative techniques. In particular, recent
studies [2, 79] have established the critical role played by
ML methods in identifying students at risk and predicting
dropout rates. Another recent meta-analysis [34] reports that
a significant majority of studies employing ML techniques
(approximately 90%) utilize supervised learning (with classification accounting for 78% and regression accounting for
12%), while a smaller fraction (10%) applies unsupervised
learning. Within the realm of supervised learning, the metaanalysis identifies the most frequently used ML algorithms
for these approaches, including Random Forest, Decision
Tree, Support Vector Machine, Naive Bayes, Linear Regression, Logistic Regression, Artificial Neural Network (ANN),
K-Nearest Neighbor, Gradient Boosted Trees, and eXtreme
Gradient Boosting. Another meta-analysis by [10], which

123

6180

J. R. Rico-Juan et al.

encompasses 260 studies focused on predicting student performance within the scope of Educational Data Mining
(EDM), states that the most popular data-mining algorithms
are ANN and Random Forest. Nevertheless, it is crucial to
acknowledge that there is no single “best” algorithm with
which to predict academic performance, as different ML
algorithms excel in various knowledge domains [79]. Furthermore, the effectiveness of these algorithms may vary
according to the application of feature selection and whether
the evaluation metrics include only precision or both precision and Kappa scores [32].

of the Big Five Inventory (BFI-44), which has been
repeatedly validated by the research community [52], was
selected. This questionnaire includes 44 items, divided as
follows: N (8 items), E (8 items), A (9 items), C (9 items),
and O (10 items).
– PAP: A measure of previous academic performance. A
score ranging from 0 to 14, which is obtained by combining the student’s high school grade point average (GPA),
the mandatory college admission test score (CATS_M),
and the optional college admission test score (CATS_O).
The calculation of this score is as follows: a maximum
of 10 points is achievable by computing the result of
0.6 ∗ G P A + 0.4 ∗ C AT S_M. The additional 4 points
(required in order to attain a total of 14) are obtained from
the optional section of the college admission test score.
– Four pairs of LMS-A variables, corresponding to four
points in time (T1, T2, T3, and T4) and a distinction
between accesses inside the classroom (IA), and outside
the classroom (OA). For example, LMS-OA-T3 would
correspond to the number of accesses to the Moodle platform made from outside the classroom by each student
at the end of week 12.
– Subject code. Moreover, if the instructors’ intention is for
the model to predict academic performance across various related subjects, they should include the subject code
as an additional variable so as to account for differences
in difficulty in different subjects. This inclusion is crucial, because not all subjects, even those within the same
domain, share the same level of difficulty, and this variance can significantly influence students’ performance
scores.

4 The machine learning process
A step-by-step illustration of our proposed ML process is
provided in Fig. 2. This figure shows the three main phases
of the approach: data collection, ML model generation and
selection, and post-hoc explainability. By following this process, instructors are able to generate their own ML models,
tailored to the specific characteristics of their educational
contexts, in order to predict academic performance, identify
risk groups and implement early interventions effectively.
The instructor starts by collecting data in the three key
areas identified by the conceptual model (see Fig. 1). The
set of variables (predictors) that must be considered for any
instructor who intends to apply our approach for the training
of four candidate models (Time 1, Time 2, Time 3 and Time
4, see Fig. 2) includes:
– The five personality variables (N, E, A, C, and O). In order
to measure the personality constructs, the Spanish version

Data
collection

ML model generation and
selection

Time 4

Prior Academic
Performance

Post-hoc explainability of
the selected ML model
Important features

Time 3
Time 2
Time 1

Student
personality
Machine
learning

Global

Individual

Prediction and analysis tool

Academic
engagement

Risk group

Model
Early intervention measures

Fig. 2 Proposed ML process: an overview

123

Study regarding the influence of a student’s personality and an LMS usage profile...

Four different ML models are then trained, each corresponding to a different point in time (Time 1 through Time 4).
At each point in time, Explainable Artificial Intelligence
(XAI) techniques are applied to the corresponding model in
order to understand the features that influence the predictions
at that point in time. This step helps demystify the decisions
made by the ML model and identify which factors are most
important as regards predicting academic risk in the instructor’s context. The instructor can subsequently perform cohort
analysis in order to detect patterns or common characteristics
among groups of students at risk. This can involve clustering
students on the basis of the predictions made by the model
and analyzing the characteristics of these clusters. Finally,
using the insights gained from the ML model and the XAI
and cohort analyses as a basis, the instructor can devise and
implement intervention strategies that are applicable at that
point in time with the objective of mitigating the identified
risks. The objective of these interventions is to support at-risk
students and improve their chances of academic success.
At the end of the course, the instructor will have four
potential models (T1, T2, T3, T4) with which to elucidate
academic performance. It is then time for the instructor to
choose the model that best aligns with the unique characteristics of their educational context. This choice is informed
by both the predictive accuracy of the model and the timing
of the application, thus favoring the earlier detection of atrisk students whenever feasible. After making this choice, in
subsequent years, the instructors will need only to deploy the
chosen model at the predetermined time to obtain a prediction of academic success that is customized to the distinctive
nature of their particular course.

5 Design of case study
In order to demonstrate the feasibility of the approach proposed in this paper, we have applied it to our educational
context. This case study can be classified as a cross-sectional
study within the observational research category. Observational studies are a type of empirical research in which
the independent variables cannot be manipulated (as occurs
in experiments or quasi-experiments). They are instead
observed, and the researcher draws conclusions based on
those observations [15]. When compared to other types
of empirical studies, cross-sectional studies have one main
disadvantage: they allow neither the establishment of causeeffect relationships nor alternative explanations for the results
obtained. However, despite this limitation, they are still valuable in education as they can help confirm assumptions and
inform educational actions [21].

6181

5.1 Objectives and definition of context
The main objective of this case study was to illustrate the viability of the approach proposed in this paper, and to generate
an ML model and an associated tool that would be capable of
predicting, with sufficient precision, students’ academic performance in the context of first and second-year university
students enrolled on two mathematical subjects at a Spanish
university.

5.2 Research questions
We additionally sought to address the following research
questions based on the case study:
– RQ1: What is the performance improvement ratio of the
optimal model, generated using our methodology, when
compared to the baseline for student academic performance (AP) in our case study?
– RQ2: At what point during the semester can, according
to our case study findings, at-risk student groups be accurately identified in order to prevent academic failures?
– RQ3: How do individual features correlate with AP in
our case study, and is this relationship consistent across
the four proposed models?

5.3 Variables and measurement instruments
The objective of our case study was to discover a model
that would be capable of elucidating academic performance
across two related courses. We included both the eight
mandatory variables (N, E, A, C, O, PAP, LMS-IA and LMSOA) and subject code as input variables.
The outcome variable (academic performance), meanwhile, refers to the predicted final score obtained by the
students on the course.

5.4 Context of case study
The objective of our case study was to collect data from
322 first- and second-year students enrolled on the Computer
Engineering program on Albacete Campus of the University
of Castilla-La Mancha in Spain.1
As discussed in Section 1, this university period is particularly important because the transition from high school
to university can be challenging for students in terms
of developing independent learning skills, self-assessment
1 https://www.esiiab.uclm.es/plan.php?que=grado&curso=2020-21&

idmenup=planestudios

123

6182

J. R. Rico-Juan et al.

Table 1 Participants in the
study

Subject

#Total
Enrolled

#Female
Enrolled

#Male
Enrolled

#Total Participants

#Female Participants

#Male Participants

CNM

167

17

150

119

12

107

Logic

155

20

135

127

14

113

abilities and meeting expectations regarding academic performance [89, 96]. It is consequently essential to identify
students who are at risk of failure during this period, as the
majority of dropouts occur at this time [50, 63, 79].
The selection of courses for the study was determined as
follows:
– Calculus and Numerical Methods (CNM): first semester
of the first year of the degree program. This included 167
students (17 female), with a median age of 18 years and
fewer than 16% on their second enrollment.
– Logic: first semester of the second year of the degree
program. This course had 155 students (20 female), with
a median age of 19 years and fewer than 8% on their
second enrollment
This selection was made because these subjects are within
the same domain (mathematics) and, along with programming courses, tend to imply the greatest challenges for
students on the Computer Engineering degree program,
where instructors typically observe higher rates of academic
failure.

6 Phase 1: data collection
In this phase, the instructor needs to gather the measures associated with the Personality, PAP and Academic Engagement
variables (see Fig. 2).
In our case study, this gathering process started during the
first week of the first semester of the course (week 1). During
this week, the students completed the BFI-44 questionnaire
(Spanish version), together with a question in which they
stated their PAP score. Table 1 shows the number of students expected (total enrolled) and the number of students
that participated in the study by filling in the BFI-44 questionnaire (total number of participants). We also show the
same numbers disaggregated by gender. The students were

Table 2 Final grade of the participants in CNM and Logic subjects
Subject

count

mean

std

min

25%

50%

75%

max

CNM

119

6.1

2.0

1.0

4.6

6.3

7.5

10.0

Logic

127

7.0

1.8

2.3

6.0

7.2

8.2

10.0

123

not warned in advance that a questionnaire was going to be
administered, signifying that we can safely assume that the
lack of participation in the study was not related to the study
itself.
The Cronbach’s Alpha values calculated for the five
scales on the Big Five (BF) questionnaire are the following: Extraversion: 0.807 (8 items); Agreeableness: 0.702
(9 items); Conscientiousness: 0.783 (9 items); Neuroticism:
0.829 (8 items); and Openness: 0.753 (10 items). The fact that
all values fall between 0.7 and 0.9 indicates good internal
consistency for the scales, without the items being redundant [82].
Data regarding the number of accesses to the LMS was
then gathered by one of the instructors at four points in time
during the semester: after one month (week 4), after two
months (week 8), after three months (week 12) and just before
the exam took place (week 15).
The students on both courses had to perform a set of evaluative activities that would enable them to obtain 45% of
their grade. The remaining 55% was calculated on the basis
of several partial exams. In the event of the students failing
one or more partial exams, they had the opportunity to retake
the course by participating in a final exam during the official examination period established by the university, before
the beginning of the next semester. Both the activities and
the exams (partial and final) were graded by the instructor
responsible for the course on a scale of 0 to 10. In order to
pass a course, a weighted final mark of 5 out of 10 is required,
with at least a 4 out of 10 in the examination part.

6.1 Descriptive statistics
These data can be analyzed using various open-source software tools and libraries.2
Descriptive statistics of the final grades (the output measure), disaggregated by subject, can be seen in Table 2.
Figure 3 comprises the combined violin and box plot graph
that represents the distribution of these same grades disaggregated by subject. This graph demonstrates that both subjects
have a wide distribution of grades, implying significant vari2 For our case study, several Python routines were developed by one of

the authors. The primary Python libraries utilized include scikit-learn
v1.2.2, xgboost v1.7.4, and catboost 1.1.1, which are used in order to
implement ML algorithms, the SHAP library v0.41, which are employed
in order to analyze XAI-ML aspects, and plotnine v0.10.1 and ggplot2
v4.2.3 (R statistical language), which serve to construct plots.

Study regarding the influence of a student’s personality and an LMS usage profile...

Fig. 3 Combined violin and box plot showing the distribution of final
grades in CNM and Logic subjects

ability in student performance. In CNM, the mean is below
the median, indicating a distribution that is slightly skewed
towards lower grades. In Logic, the mean is very close to
the median, suggesting a more symmetrical distribution of
grades. CNM also has a longer lower tail, which implies that
there are more students with lower grades. In summary, this
distribution seems to suggest that the subject of Logic is easier for students, whose academic performance is generally
better than in CNM.
Figures 4, 5, and 6 show the combined violin and box plot
graph, illustrating the distribution of the input data required
by our approach.
The shape of the violins and the position of the mean
in Fig. 4 (PAP variable), suggest that there is no significant
difference between the distribution of the entrance grades for
CNM and Logic, although CNM has a slightly higher median.
This indicates that the mean entrance grades for these two
subjects are similar.
Figure 5 (Personality) additionally suggests that there are
no marked differences between the personality profiles of
the CNM and Logic students with respect to the five traits

6183

evaluated. The medians and means are quite similar for each
trait, which implies that the groups of students in these two
subjects are alike in terms of personality.
Finally, Fig. 6 (Academic Engagement) shows the distribution of the variables measuring (a) number of accesses to
the Moodle platform during in-person class hours (LMS-IA)
measured at four points in time (T1 to T4) and (b) number of
accesses outside these hours (LMS-OA), also recorded at the
same four points in time (T1 to T4). A robust normalization
(Rn ) was applied in order to mitigate the impact of outliers
in the distribution of academic engagement variables (Fig. 6)
(1). In this formula, the functions q1 , q2 , and q3 correspond
to the first, second and third quartiles, respectively, according
to the subject under consideration, s.
Rn (y, s) =

yi − q2 (y, s)
q3 (y, s) − q1 (y, s)

(1)

This normalization makes the measures comparable across
different time horizons and subjects. As expected, there is a
greater dispersion for the LMS-OA variables, especially in
the Logic subject.

7 Phase 2: generation and selection of ML
model
After collecting the necessary data, the instructors are now
ready to employ ML techniques so as to identify the optimal
algorithm and ML model tailored to their context of usage
(see Fig. 2).

7.1 Selection of ML algorithm
Figure 7 provides a more detailed examination of the activities undertaken in this phase.
7.1.1 Selection of an initial set of machine learning
algorithms
The initial suite of ML algorithms incorporated into our
methodology, which were obtained from the relevant literature [48], encompasses the array of most widely-used
supervised algorithms highlighted in Section 3, along with
several new algorithms with which to represent the principal
machine learning styles in a comprehensive manner. These
include:

Fig. 4 Combined violin and box plot depicting the distribution of the
PAP variable

– Baseline: This algorithm computes the average outcome
without considering predictors (independent variables).
– Linear regression: This is a common type of regression
used for value prediction, which assumes independence
between variables and applies a coefficient for each input

123

6184

J. R. Rico-Juan et al.

Fig. 5 Combined violin and box
plot depicting the distribution of
the BF personality variables:
Agreeableness (A),
Consciousness (C), Extraversion
(E), Openness to Experience
(O), and Neuroticism (N)

Post-hoc explicability

Feature impact on the
model output

Select best
model

10-fold cross-validation

Data

Fig. 7 Diagram illustrating the
ML-based process utilized in
order to extract pertinent
information

Machine Learning models

Fig. 6 Combined violin and box
plot depicting the distribution of
the academic engagement
variables (in-class and
out-of-class) at different time
points, using robust
normalization

Global

Individual

Cohort analysis

123

Study regarding the influence of a student’s personality and an LMS usage profile...

variable plus a single overall fit value. In this study, we
tested different variants by employing coefficient adjustment methods. These variants are:
– Simple Linear Regression with least squares adjustment [90]
– LASSO [84] with l1 regularisation
– Ridge [45] with l2 regularisation
– Bayesian Ridge [85] with l2 regularisation and noise
adjustment
– Automatic Relevance Determination (ARD) [59]
with Gaussian precision and noise adjustment using
the evidence maximization technique.
– Decision tree [18]: This algorithm predicts the value of a
sample in a hierarchical manner on the basis of straightforward learning rules. The tree is constructed using
the training samples, and only one feature is taken into
account for each rule.
– Random Forest [17]: In order to create a more stable and
robust model than a single decision tree, this algorithm
builds several decision trees. All individual forecasts are
considered in order to calculate the final prediction.
– AdaBoost (Adaptive Boosting) [37]: This algorithm constructs several linear regression models during the first
training phase. The algorithm predicts the value of a
new sample by taking into account all the predictions
of the regressors weighted with weights learned during
the training phase.
– Tree boosting: XGBboost (eXtreme Gradient Boosting) [22] and CatBoost (Category Boosting) [31] are
based on the use of multiple decision trees, and boosting
is employed in the training phase. They also use derivable
cost functions and gradient descent for weight adjustment, similar to that which occurs with neural networks,
but each applies different strategies.
– Support vector machine [24]: This algorithm consists of
two phases. In the first phase, the original data space is
translated into a usually higher dimensional space. In the
second phase, a hyperplane with which to separate the
samples in the new space is found.
– Neural Network (Multilayer Perceptron) [43]: All the
layers in this basic neural network architecture are fully
connected.
– Nearest Neighbors [25]: This algorithm uses a similarity
function, commonly the Euclidean distance, to find the
k (parameter) closest known samples in the training set.
Its prediction is computed on the basis of these closest
samples. In our study, we set the values of k to 1, 3, 5, 7,
and 9.
For all algorithms, we propose to adhere to the default
configurations for all model parameters, with the exception
of the case of the neighborhood-based algorithm. With this

6185

algorithm, experimenting with varying numbers of neighbors
resulted in improved performance, especially when dealing
with noisy data. Table 3 enumerates the algorithms, the corresponding library functions, and their respective parameters
in order to facilitate the reproducibility of our experiments,
7.1.2 Selection of the best model using the 10-fold
cross-validation technique and pairwise comparisons
The second activity consists of evaluating the set of ML algorithms selected in order to identify that which is optimal,
under the assumption that different contexts may yield different optimal algorithms.
We propose to identify the best algorithm by using
the k-fold cross-validation technique, a method commonly
employed in this field. This technique involves dividing the
original sample set into several partitions of a similar size
(typically 10) and iterating through them, with one partition
serving as the test set and the remaining partitions used as
the training set. This generates multiple results (equal to the
number of partitions) for each algorithm, which can then be
averaged in order to yield a final result or be tested against
hypotheses so as to compare algorithms.
The evaluation metric that we propose for the ML models is the root mean square error (RMSE) [67]. This metric,
which is defined in (2), utilizes vectors y and ŷ of size
n, where y represents the true values and ŷ represents the
predicted values. The RMSE is commonly utilized for regression problems, as it (a) utilizes the square of the difference
between the true and predicted values (residuals) to further
penalize differences, and (b) maintains the same units of measurement by applying the square root to the average of these
residuals.

R M S E(y, ŷ) =

1
(yi − ŷi )2
n

(2)

To return to our case study, Fig. 8 presents the average RMSE for the outcomes of the 10-fold cross-validation
applied separately to the defined predictors: personality
(encompassing the five personality traits), academic engagement (represented by the eight LMS-A variables) and capacity (PAP). The findings illustrate that linear approximation
algorithms generally yield a superior performance in our context, likely attributable to the linear characteristics of the
variables under consideration. Of these, the ARD algorithm
stands out as one of the top performers. In this figure, the
most favorable RMSE values were observed for PAP (1.54),
Personality (1.75), and LMS-A (1.76), with gain-to-baseline
ratios of 0.794, 0.903 and 0.906, respectively (the lower the
better).
The instructor must now explore the average RMSE of
the 10-fold cross-validation outcomes for all the predictors

123

6186

J. R. Rico-Juan et al.

Table 3 Algorithms, functions and parameters used in the experiments
Algorithm

Function

Parameters

Baseline

DummyRegressor

Mean

Linear Regression

LinearRegression

Intercept=True

ARD

ARDRegressor

tol=0.001, alpha_1=1e-06, alpha_2=1e-06, lambda_1=1e-06, lambda_2=1e-06,
threshold_lambda=10000.0, fit_intercept=True

Bayesian Ridge

BayesianRidge

tol=0.001, alpha_1=1e-06, alpha_2=1e-06, lambda_1=1e-06, lambda_2=1e-06,
fit_intercept=True

Lasso

Lasso

alpha=1.0, fit_intercept=True, tol=0.0001, max_iter=1000

Ridge

Ridge

fit_intercept=True, tol=0.0001, solver=‘auto’

NN

KNeighborsRegressor

n_neighbors={1,3,5,7,9}

Linear SVM

SVM

kernel=‘linear’, degree=3, gamma=‘scale’, coef0=0.0, tol=0.001, C=1.0, epsilon=0.1,
shrinking=True

RBF SVM

SVM

kernel=‘rbf’, degree=3, gamma=‘scale’, coef0=0.0, tol=0.001, C=1.0, epsilon=0.1,
shrinking=True

AdaBoost

AdaBoostRegressor

n_estimators=50, learning_rate=1.0, loss=‘linear’

Neural Net

MLPRegressor

hidden_layer_sizes=(100,), activation=‘relu’, solver=‘adam’, alpha=0.0001,
batch_size=‘auto’, learning_rate=‘constant’, learning_rate_init=0.001, power_t=0.5,
max_iter=200, shuffle=True, tol=0.0001, momentum=0.9, early_stopping=False, validation_fraction=0.1, beta_1=0.9, beta_2=0.999, epsilon=1e-08, max_fun=15000

Decision Tree

DecisionTreeRegressor

criterion=‘squared_error’, splitter=‘best’, max_depth=None, min_samples_split=2,
min_samples_leaf=1, min_weight_fraction_leaf=0.0, min_impurity_decrease=0.0,
ccp_alpha=0.0

Random Forest

RandomForestRegressor

n_estimators=100, criterion=‘squared_error’, min_samples_split=2,
min_samples_leaf=1, min_weight_fraction_leaf=0.0, max_features=1.0,
min_impurity_decrease=0.0, bootstrap=True, oob_score=False, ccp_alpha=0.0

XGB

XGBRegressor

learning_rate=0.3, n_estimators=100, max_depth=6, min_child_weight=1, subsample=1, colsample_bytree=1, gamma=0, reg_alpha=0, reg_lambda=1

CatBoost

CatBoostRegressor

learning_rate=0.03, n_estimators=1000, max_depth=6, l2_leaf_reg=3.0, bootstrap_type=‘MVS’, subsample=1.0, colsample_bylevel=1.0

together at each point in time so as to ensure that their combination improves the performance of the model. We propose
that this validation method be uniformly applied across all
machine learning algorithms utilizing the same sample partitions, thus facilitating the subsequent pairwise comparisons.
In our case study, this exploration is presented in Fig. 9,
which combines PAP, personality, and a dynamic evaluation
of academic engagement characteristics throughout a fourmonth period. Once again, the best algorithms in our case
study tend to involve linear approximations.
The third step when selecting the optimal model involves
conducting a pairwise comparison in order to assess the
significance of the RMSE generated by the 10-fold crossvalidation of the algorithms under consideration for prediction.
Figure 10 illustrates this pairwise comparison within the
context of our case study. The pairwise comparisons were
carried out using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test [91], adopting the standard 95% confidence level [80] with Holm’s
adjustment [47], a non-parametric statistical test that does

123

not assume a normal distribution of the means. The findings
indicate that linear models significantly outperform the others (as denoted by the green bullets).
The instructor can now employ all of these results to select
the best model. In our case study, ARD has been selected as
the best algorithm because, although the differences between
all the linear models are not significant, ARD achieved the
best average results.
Furthermore, note that the average RMSE values for ARD
at the different time intervals are similar: 1.43, 1.42, 1.43 and
1.42 for T1, T2, T3 and T4, respectively. This means that, in
the context of our case study, it is safe to make predictions
regarding academic performance at T1, because they are very
similar to those that would be made at the end of the academic
year, T4.
It is also worth noting that the gain over the baseline using
this model and a combination of features is around 0.73,
which is better than the 0.79 obtained using the PAP alone.
The results achieved thus far can be employed as the basis
on which to address RQ1 by noting that the optimal model

Study regarding the influence of a student’s personality and an LMS usage profile...

6187

Fig. 8 Average RMSE of the 10-fold cross-validation results for PAP,
the five personality predictors (personality), and the eight LMS-A
variables (academic engagement) using various machine learning algorithms. Lower error values indicate a better performance. The numbers

at the end of the bars indicate the RMSE error, and the percentage
of relative improvement from the baseline is shown in parentheses
as err or (algorithm)/err or (baseline). The baseline results are highlighted in blue

generated using our methodology yields a gain-to-baseline
ratio of 0.73, indicating an approximate increase of 27%
in precision when compared to the baseline. Moreover, the
applicability of this model as early as four weeks into the
semester provides a response to RQ2.
However, RQ3 can be addressed only by carrying out a
further analysis.

The second approach involves building an additional linear model on top of the original model. This approach is led
by the Shapley values [76] and is based on game theory. In
essence, the Shapley values quantify the average incremental
contribution of a variable when combined with other variables. The Shapley approximation is particularly useful in
those scenarios in which each variable contributes unequally
to the final outcome (target variable), thus ensuring local
accuracy, omission handling and consistency. It is for these
reasons that the Shapley approach has been used in this study.
One limitation of the Shapley approach is that its values are
general and its calculation applies to the total values studied.
However, recent advances [56, 57] make it possible to extend
its application to different contexts, such as groups of samples or individual samples. The SHAP (SHapley Additive
exPlanations) [55] tool makes it possible to leverage these
advancements.
A scheme of the integration of the SHAP post-hoc explainability process with the ML training process that we advocate
in our approach is presented in Fig. 11. This shows how an
explainer model is built (using a linear approach) on top of
the trained ML model in order to provide an explanation for
the prediction.
The outcomes of applying this SHAP explainability process to the ARD model chosen for our case study are shown
below, and we also show how the results have allowed us to
address RQ3.

8 Phase 3: Post-hoc explainability of the ML
model selected
Having selected the best model, it is now time for the instructor to apply ML post-hoc explainability techniques [8] (see
the last activity in Fig. 7). These techniques can uniformly
explain the results, regardless of the particular algorithm,
the linear/nonlinear relationships between variables and the
learning styles. Their application assists as regards interpreting the results produced by the model and enhances the
instructor’s confidence in its predictions.
Two main approaches can be employed in order to achieve
a certain level of interpretability and determine the importance of a variable input in the model. The first approach
involves a statistical technique based on performing permutations on the input variables [17], establishing a relationship
between these modifications and the predictions, and thus
estimating the importance of the variable.

123

6188

Fig. 9 Average RMSE of the 10-fold cross-validation outcomes for
the personality and academic engagement predictors at different time
intervals (spaced one month apart) using several machine learning algorithms together. Lower error values indicate a better performance. The

Fig. 10 Pairwise comparison of
significance between the RMSE
values obtained from the 10-fold
cross-validation after applying
the Wilcoxon signed-rank test.
Green bullets indicate that the
row algorithm is significantly
better than the column algorithm

123

J. R. Rico-Juan et al.

numbers at the end of the bars indicate the RMSE error, and the percentage of relative improvement from the baseline is shown in parentheses
as err or (algorithm)/err or (baseline). The baseline results are highlighted in blue

Data

Study regarding the influence of a student’s personality and an LMS usage profile...

6189

Machine Learning
model trained

Prediction

Explainer
model

Explanation

Fig. 11 General scheme of the post-hoc explainability process that is performed on top of the trained ML model

8.1 RQ3: consistency of features correlation with AP
For the sake of comparability, Fig. 12 shows the average
impact of the chosen set of input variables on AP at T1 and
T4.
Our results indicate that, in our case study, the same variables are relevant as regards predicting AP at both points
in time (PAP, Subject code, Conscientiousness, Openness to
experience, Agreeableness, and LMS outclass counts). The
fact that the same predictors operate at T1 and T4 suggests
the consistency of the model over time.
In order to further explore the individual relationships
between relevant features and AP, Fig. 13 presents a grid plot
depicting the shape of the relationship for each combination.
The figure highlights that PAP is the most relevant variable
with a positive relationship on both courses. The Openness
to Experience personality variable also has a negative relationship on both courses, meaning that higher Openness to
Experience correlates with lower final grades. Moreover, the
student’s access to the LMS outside class time (LMS-OA-T1
and LMS-OA-T4) has a positive relationship, with slight differences between CNM and Logic. Agreeableness also has
a slight influence, with a negative relationship. Finally, the
course itself also has an impact on the grades, with a tendency
toward better grades in Logic, which is a second-year subject, than in CNM (a first-year subject), indicating a greater
difficulty of the CNM subject.

8.2 Cohort analysis
The analyses conducted thus far have resulted in a customized
model with which to predict a student’s final grade at a specific point in time (T1 to T4). In order to enable instructors to
attain a greater understanding of the factors that most influence performance in their analytical context, our proposal
includes a cohort analysis as the final step. This analysis
allows the division of the students for whom the ML model
has been customized into n performance groups (n cohorts)

on the basis of a set of specific rules, conditions or criteria
that define each group.
Our proposal suggests that this group formation should be
automated in a manner similar to the way in which decision
trees are created (decision tree method). In this automatic
cohort formation, the most relevant variables for the samples
analyzed are evaluated on the basis of the target variable, and
a split is applied to one of them in each step so as to form
two partitions. The use of the SHAP tool and the application
of the Gini metric (see (3)) to the samples of the partitions
being created are proposed for this purpose.
Gini(y) = 1 −

n


P(yi )2

(3)

i=0

where y is a vector with n elements and P(yi ) represents the
probability of the element yi being misclassified.
The process starts with the total set of samples and divides
it into subsets until the maximum number of sets is attained.
The main advantage of this additional step is that the algorithm automatically identifies the optimal cohorts on the basis
of logical criteria, and helps uncover rules that might not be
obvious a priori.
Returning to our case study, using the ML model at T1 as
a basis, we decided to create five cohorts, which, in our educational context, were considered sufficient to differentiate
between various profiles while still ensuring that the subsets
contained an adequate number of samples.
Table 4 shows the rules automatically generated, defining the five specified cohorts for our case study. Similarly,
Fig. 14 illustrates these rules as a binary tree. In both representations, there are some descriptors of the groups formed,
such as their size, median of the final grades, and the significance of differences between them determined by applying
the U Mann-Whitney U test [61]. In the first group, individuals with a PAP score exceeding 10.85 achieve the highest
final grades, averaging 8.6. In the case of those who do not
meet this criterion, their subject performance is determined

123

6190

J. R. Rico-Juan et al.

Fig. 12 Average impact of input factors on AP. The graph at the top represents T1 (week 4), while the graph at the bottom represents T4 (end of
the course)

by the number of accesses they make outside class time during period T1. If the number of accesses is above 104, they are
assigned to groups 2 (average 7.2) or 3 (average 6.0) on the
basis of their PAP score (greater or lower than 7.4), whereas
if it is below 104, they are assigned to groups 4 (average 5.8)
or 5 (average 3.7) on the basis of whether they have a PAP
score that is greater or lower than 6.58.
Using the cohorts generated as a starting point, it is possible to identify at-risk groups by selecting those cohorts
whose mean predictor value falls below a certain threshold.
In our case, and based on the criteria outlined in Table 4 and

123

in Fig. 14, cohorts 4 (PAP <= 10.85) & (LMS-OA-T1 <=
104) & (PAP > 6.58) and 5 (’LMS-OA-T1’ <= 104) & (PAP
<= 6.58) indicate student groups of a potentially low academic performance, with the latter group being at extreme
risk, with a median AP score of 3.7 over 10.

8.3 Prediction and analysis tool
Finally, in order to facilitate both individual-level academic
performance prediction with explainability and group-level
estimation and analysis in the context of our case study, we

Study regarding the influence of a student’s personality and an LMS usage profile...

6191

Fig. 13 Individual impact of the most relevant variables on AP. The sub-figures are ordered from top to bottom on the basis of their average impact
value indicated in brackets. The horizontal axis of each sub-figure shows the density of samples in each corresponding area

123

6192

J. R. Rico-Juan et al.

Table 4 Number of students and median value of the output predictor using cohort rules at T1
Id

Cohort

Size

Median

(1)

(‘PAP’ > 10.85)

55

8.6

** (2,3,4,5)

(2)

(‘PAP’ <= 10.85) & (‘LMS-OA-T1’ > 104) & (‘PAP’ > 7.4)

65

7.2

** (3,4,5)

(3)

(‘PAP’<= 10.85) & (‘LMS-OA-T1’> 104) & (‘PAP’<= 7.4)

33

6.0

* (4), ** (5)

(4)

(‘PAP’<= 10.85) & (‘LMS-OA-T1’<= 104) & (‘PAP’> 6.58)

81

5.8

**(5)

(5)

(‘PAP’<= 10.85) & (‘LMS-OA-T1’<= 104) & (‘PAP’<= 6.58)

12

3.7

Asterisks (**) indicate significant differences (at 95% confidence level) between cohorts (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5) based on the output variable

have created a simple yet functional and effective tool. We
have utilized Python Jupyter notebook technology with the
Google Colab online service, which was chosen for its free
access and the requirement of only a web browser for use.
It is available at this link. This tool is already being used by
the instructors of the subjects included in our case of study,
and could also serve as an example and a basis for other
developments, as its source code is accessible.

9 Discussion
This paper makes two main contributions. Firstly, it proposes
a conceptual model that is based on the MHP and includes
three factors: personality, academic engagement and capacity. This model is sufficiently simple to allow instructors to
collect data quickly and without having to resort to academic
authorities, thus increasing its practical utility.
Secondly, it proposes an ML methodology with which
to generate tailored models for the early prediction of academic outcomes and the detection of at-risk groups in single
or related academic subjects. The process involves three
phases: (a) a data gathering phase, (b) a model generation
and selection phase and (c) a post-hoc explainability phase.
Fig. 14 Cohort rules at T1,
represented as a decision tree.
Asterisks (**) indicate
significant differences (at 95%
confidence level) between
cohorts (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5)
based on the output variable

The use of XAI techniques increases the transparency and
interpretability of the model selected, thus enabling educators to better understand and trust in their predictions, which
can inform the proposal of more effective intervention plans.
Moreover, the inclusion of cohort analysis techniques allows
group-level estimation and analysis.
In order to illustrate the feasibility of the approach, the
paper shows the application of the proposed methodology
to a case study in which an ML model was selected and
trained with data concerning students enrolled in two different mathematics-related subjects taught in the first and
second year of a Computer Engineering degree program.
While recent meta-analyses have reported a prediction capacity of up to 25% for cognitive ability [69], the proxy of
academic capacity (PAP) of our model has a slightly lower
gain-to-baseline (20.6%), using just one easily-collected
measure. This gain-to-baseline increases to 26.4% when all
the variables are considered together. The context of the case
study (mathematics and first and second year subjects) maximizes the practical impact of the model obtained, as they are
the years and subjects in which the highest academic failure
rates occur in the Spanish system. In this case study, significant insights were obtained from relatively small sample
sizes, demonstrating a uniform pattern across two different

(PAP> 10.85)
no

(LMS-OA-T1> 104)
yes

no

(PAP> 7.4)

(PAP> 6.58)

yes
yes

Group (1)
Median: 8.6
Size: 55
** (2,3,4,5)

123

Group (2)
Median: 7.2
Size: 65
** (3,4,5)

no

Group (3)
Median: 6.0
Size: 33
** (4,5)

yes

Group (4)
Median: 5.8
Size: 31
** (5)

no

Group (5)
Median: 3.7
Size: 12

Study regarding the influence of a student’s personality and an LMS usage profile...

subjects, despite variations in teaching methods and instructors, within the same academic discipline.
Our case study reveals that, while non-cognitive variables
in related literature can explain up to an additional 25% of
the variability in performance, this percentage greatly varies
depending on the particular context. In our case study, the
non-cognitive components included (academic engagement
and personality) explain only an additional 6%, although
when analyzed separately, they explain 9.4% and 9.7%,
respectively (see Fig. 8). One possible explanation for this
is that the variables of willingness, and particularly personality, which is measured in a manner similar to that
shown in related literature, may not have a significant predictive capability in mathematics subjects when compared to
other fields. Whatever the reason, this fact underscores the
need for instructors to develop customized models that are
finely tuned to the unique characteristics of their educational
environment. The three personality variables that are most
strongly associated with academic achievement in our case
study are consciousness, openness to experience, and agreeableness. These variables have also been identified as being
the most relevant in related meta-analyses [69, 74, 86]. The
positive impact of consciousness is expected and easily justifiable, as thoroughness and diligence are widely recognized
as having a positive impact on academic outcomes. However,
in contrast to other studies, our findings indicate that openness to experience has an inverse relationship with success
in our context. Students with greater openness to experience
perform worse, as shown in Fig. 13. This negative impact of
openness suggests that students with higher levels of imagination, aesthetic sensitivity and need for variety may not
perform as well in mathematical subjects, despite the fact
that these traits are considered positive in other areas and
at lower levels of education [70]. Our case study therefore
supports the approach of analyzing subjects belonging to different areas of knowledge separately. Finally, agreeableness
is the third most important influential personality variable in
our context, which is consistent with existing meta-analyses
[86].
Our cohort analysis shows that academic engagement is
the most important willingness-related factor as regards classifying students at risk in the context of our case study.
Despite its dynamic nature [2], our case study demonstrates
that this variable can be useful in certain contexts when measured as soon as even one month into the semester (T1).
This can be justified on the grounds that procrastination is a
major impediment to academic success at university [74], and
students engaging early in the class dynamics consequently
have greater possibilities of success. Also related to this analysis, it is worth noting that the decision tree derived during
the cohort analysis relies solely on the PAP and the LMSOA-T1 variables to determine the groups, indicating that
academic engagement and capacity overshadow the impact

6193

of personality in the context of this study, which simplifies
the identification of students at risk.
Finally, and similar to that which occurs in other contexts
[71], the case study shows that combining the capacity and
willingness variables increases the global classification accuracy of our model when compared to relying exclusively on
one type of variable. Our gain-to-baseline result (26%) is
comparable to the gains shown in a recent meta-analysis that
included studies that predicted academic performance on the
basis of a mixture of cognitive and non-cognitive measures
[60]. Moreover, our results highlight the superior predictive power of PAP, with a relative importance of 50.24%
(slightly lower than the relative importance of 64% reported
for a similar measure in [60]), while personality has a relative importance of 21.24% (also slightly lower than the 28%
reported in [60]). These differences can be attributed to the
inclusion of academic engagement, which was not considered in the meta-analysis carried out by [60].

9.1 Main limitations of the approach
The case study presented in this paper highlights that the proposed approach has the potential to generate customized ML
models with which to predict academic performance. However, it is vital to acknowledge its main limitations. Firstly,
the creation of an optimal model necessitates a full academic
term for data gathering and analysis in order to identify the
most suitable model for the specific context. This model can
then assist in identifying at-risk students in future terms,
provided that the context of the subject remains relatively
unchanged. Secondly, instructors need a fundamental understanding of ML in order to apply this process effectively.
Lastly, the dependence on LMS data as a surrogate for academic engagement could restrict its use for those instructors
who do not employ these platforms.

9.2 Practical implications
The proposed methodology, which involves integrating a
conceptual framework with a Machine Learning process so
as to generate personalized models with which to predict academic performance in higher education, provides significant
practical benefits for instructors:
– Early Identification of Needs: It helps identify students
who may require additional support, thus enabling early
interventions.
– Learning Personalization: It allows instructors to tailor educational strategies to the individual needs and
characteristics of students, thus improving learning effectiveness.
– Improvement of Pedagogical Strategies: It provides
insights into how different aspects of personality and

123

6194

academic engagement affect performance, thus guiding
instructors as regards optimizing their teaching methods.
– Encouragement of Academic Engagement: By better
understanding the influence of engagement on academic performance, instructors can design activities that
increase student participation and motivation.
These implications highlight the potential of the proposal
to transform higher education, emphasizing personalization
and the continuous improvement of the teaching-learning
process.

10 Conclusions and future work
In this paper, we have presented a method that includes both
a conceptual model and a ML process with which to predict
academic performance. We believe that the parsimony of the
conceptual model and the clear step-by-step description of
the process significantly increase the likelihood of our proposal being adopted in university settings.
Our approach has the objective of assisting instructors
in the detection of at-risk groups and implement targeted
interventions with which to prevent academic failure as soon
as possible in the semester, ultimately leading to improved
academic outcomes. The use of XAI techniques and cohort
analysis allows a more comprehensive understanding of the
factors that influence performance in each particular context,
leading to more effective risk mitigation strategies.
The application of the approach to a case study involving
two first and second-year mathematical subjects demonstrates that the accuracy of the resulting model is consistent
with the findings reported in literature. The model and the
associated Colab notebook are currently aiding instructors of
these subjects to devise targeted strategies aimed at lowering
the rates of academic failure, thereby enhancing educational
outcomes.
As part of our future work, we plan to apply this method
in various new contexts so as to assess the ability of the
approach to generate similarly valuable models for other
courses and universities. Moreover, we are exploring the
incorporation of other easily collectible variables in order to
enrich the willingness dimension of the conceptual model,
such as the admission option (the order in which students
chose their current degree program) [79] and the grades
they aspire to achieve [74] so as to determine whether these
additions enhance the predictive accuracy of the models.
Finally, we aim to investigate how our approach compares (in
terms of both effectiveness and complexity) with other new
approaches, such as those that use expanded user and item
features by employing the latent factor space of auxiliary
domains. These approaches enrich the feature set with underlying patterns in user-item interactions that may not be
directly observable in the current context [94, 95]. One

123

J. R. Rico-Juan et al.

potential advantage of these methods is that, once these latent
vectors have been obtained for the students, the feature set
of any target domain in which these students participate can
be expanded by incorporating these vectors without the need
for any further data collection or analysis. This expanded
feature set provides a richer representation of the students,
thus enabling more nuanced predictions about student performance or preferences.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank the students who kindly
agreed to participate in our study.
Funding Open Access funding provided thanks to the CRUE-CSIC
agreement with Springer Nature. This work has been partially funded
by the Instituto de Ciencias de la Educación (ICE) of the University of Alicante through their ‘Programa de redes de investigación
en docencia universitaria’ in the 2023/2024 edition (Red 5942), and
the UCLM group, cofinanced with ERDF funds (research grant 2022GRIN-34113). This paper reflects the views of only the authors, and the
funding bodies cannot be held responsible for any use which may be
made of the information contained therein.
Data Availability Dataset is available for research purposes from the
first author.

Declarations
Conflicts of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material
in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your
intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the
permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References
1. Affuso G, Zannone A, Esposito C, Pannone M, Miranda MC, De
Angelis G, Aquilar S, Dragone M, Bacchini D (2023) The effects of
teacher support, parental monitoring, motivation and self-efficacy
on academic performance over time. Eur J Psychol Educ 38(1):1–
23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10212-021-00594-6
2. Albreiki B, Zaki N, Alashwal H (2021) A systematic literature review of student’performance prediction using machine
learning techniques. Educ Sci 11(9):552. https://doi.org/10.3390/
educsci11090552
3. Alhadabi A, Karpinski AC (2020) Grit, self-efficacy, achievement
orientation goals, and academic performance in University students. Int J Adolesc Youth 25(1):519–535. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02673843.2019.1679202

Study regarding the influence of a student’s personality and an LMS usage profile...
4. Alshamaila Y, Alsawalqah H, Aljarah I, Habib M, Faris H,
Alshraideh M, Salih BA (2024) An automatic prediction of students’ performance to support the university education system: a
deep learning approach. Multimedia Tools and Applications, pp
1–28
5. Avia M, Sanz J, Sánchez-Bernardos M, Martínez-Arias M, Silva F,
Graña J (1995) The five-factor model—II. Relations of the NEO-PI
with other personality variables. Pers Individ Differ 19(1):81–97
(1995). https://doi.org/10.1016/0191-8869(95)00007-S
6. Azevedo R (2020) Reflections on the field of metacognition:
Issues, challenges, and opportunities. Metacognition Learn 15:91–
98. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11409-020-09231-x
7. Balijepally V, Mahapatra R, Nerur SP (2006) Assessing personality profiles of software developers in agile development teams.
Commun Assoc Inf Syst 18(1):4. https://doi.org/10.17705/1CAIS.
01804
8. Barredo Arrieta A, Díaz-Rodríguez N, Del Ser J, Bennetot A,
Tabik S, Barbado A, Garcia S, Gil-Lopez S, Molina D, Benjamins
R, Chatila R, Herrera F (2020) Explainable artificial intelligence
(XAI): concepts, taxonomies, opportunities and challenges toward
responsible AI. Inf Fusion 58:82–115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
inffus.2019.12.012
9. Barrick MR (2005) Yes, personality matters: Moving on to more
important matters. Hum Perform 18(4):359–372 (2005). https://
doi.org/10.1207/s15327043hup1804_3
10. Batool S, Rashid J, Nisar MW, Kim J, Kwon HY, Hussain A (2023)
Educational data mining to predict students’ academic performance: A survey study. Educ Inf Technol 28(1):905–971. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10639-022-11152-y
11. BBVA F (2019) U-ranking 2019. indicadores sintéticos de las universidades españolas. https://www.fbbva.es/wp-content/uploads/
2019/04/Informe-U-Ranking-FBBVA-Ivie-2019.pdf
12. Beckham NR, Akeh LJ, Mitaart GNP, Moniaga JV (2023)
Determining factors that affect student performance using various machine learning methods. Procedia Comput Sci 216:597603
13. Behr A, Giese M, Teguim Kamdjou HD, Theune K (2020) Dropping out of university: a literature review. Rev Educ 8(2):614–652.
https://doi.org/10.1002/rev3.3202
14. Bergold S, Steinmayr R (2018) Personality and intelligence interact
in the prediction of academic achievement. J Intell 6(2):27. https://
doi.org/10.3390/jintelligence6020027
15. Bluman AG (2012) Elementary statistics: A step by step approach.
McGraw-Hill
16. Blumberg M, Pringle CD (1982) The missing opportunity in
organizational research: Some implications for a theory of work
performance. Acad Manag Rev 7(4):560–569. https://doi.org/10.
5465/amr.1982.4285240
17. Breiman L (2001) Random forests. Mach Learn 45(1):5–32. https://
doi.org/10.1023/A:1010933404324
18. Breiman L (2017) Classification and regression trees. Routledge.
https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315139470
19. Bressane A, Zwirn D, Essiptchouk A, Saraiva ACV, de Campos
Carvalho FL, Formiga JKS, de Castro Medeiros LC, Negri RG
(2024) Understanding the role of study strategies and learning disabilities on student academic performance to enhance educational
approaches: A proposal using artificial intelligence. Comput Educ
Artif Intell 6:100,196
20. Caprara GV, Vecchione M, Alessandri G, Gerbino M, Barbaranelli
C (2011) The contribution of personality traits and self-efficacy
beliefs to academic achievement: A longitudinal study. Br J Educ
Psychol 81(1):78–96. https://doi.org/10.1348/2044-8279.002004
21. Carlson MD, Morrison RS (2009) Study design, precision, and
validity in observational studies. J Palliat Med 12(1):77–82. https://
doi.org/10.1089/jpm.2008.9690

6195

22. Chen,T, Guestrin C (2016) XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting
System. CoRR arXiv:1603.02754
23. Cheng B, Liu Y, Jia Y (2024) Evaluation of students’ performance
during the academic period using the XG-Boost classifier-enhanced
AEO hybrid model. Expert Syst Appl 238:122,136
24. Cortes C, Vapnik V (1995) Support-vector networks. Mach Learn
20(3):273–297. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022627411411
25. Cover TM, Hart PE (1967) Nearest neighbor pattern classification.
IEEE Trans Inf Theory 13(1):21–27. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.
1967.1053964
26. Cruz S, da Silva FQ, Capretz LF (2015) Forty years of research
on personality in software engineering: A mapping study. Comput
Hum Behav 46:94–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2014.12.008
27. Cyrenne P, Chan A (2012) High school grades and university performance: A case study. Econ Educ Rev 31(5):524–542. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2012.03.005
28. De Feyter T, Caers R, Vigna C, Berings D (2012) Unraveling the
impact of the Big Five personality traits on academic performance:
The moderating and mediating effects of self-efficacy and academic
motivation. Learn Individ Differ 22(4):439–448. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.lindif.2012.03.013
29. De Raad B, Schouwenburg HC (1996) Personality in learning and
education: A review. European J Personal 10(5):303–336
30. Del Valle R, Duffy TM (2009) Online learning: Learner characteristics and their approaches to managing learning. Instr Sci
37:129–149. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11251-007-9039-0
31. Dorogush AV, Ershov V, Gulin A (2018) Catboost: gradient boosting with categorical features support. arXiv:1810.11363
32. Dunatov SM, Kasalo K, Lovrinčević A, Maljković J, Prnjak A
(2022) Predicting students’ final exam grades based on learning
material usage extracted from moodle logs. In: 2022 International conference on software, telecommunications and computer
networks (SoftCOM), pp 1–6. IEEE. https://doi.org/10.23919/
SoftCOM55329.2022.9911477
33. Eysenck HJ (1994) The big five or giant three: criteria for a
paradigm. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc
34. Fahd K, Venkatraman S, Miah SJ, Ahmed K (2022) Application of
machine learning in higher education to assess student academic
performance, at-risk, and attrition: A meta-analysis of literature.
Education and Information Technologies, pp 1–33. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10639-021-10741-7
35. Feldt R, Angelis L, Torkar R, Samuelsson M (2010) Links between
the personalities, views and attitudes of software engineers. Inf
Software Technol 52(6):611–624. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.
2010.01.001
36. Filippidi A, Tselios N, Komis V (2010) Impact of Moodle usage
practices on students’ performance in the context of a blended
learning environment. Proceedings of Social Applications for Life
Long Learning, pp 2–7
37. Freund Y, Schapire RE (1997) A decision-theoretic generalization
of on-line learning and an application to boosting. J Comput Syst
Sci 55(1):119–139. https://doi.org/10.1006/jcss.1997.1504
38. Galla BM, Shulman EP, Plummer BD, Gardner M, Hutt SJ, Goyer
JP, D’Mello SK, Finn AS, Duckworth AL (2019) Why high school
grades are better predictors of on-time college graduation than are
admissions test scores: the roles of self-regulation and cognitive
ability. Am Educ Res J 56(6):2077–2115. https://doi.org/10.3102/
0002831219843292
39. Guerra S (2016) Prueba Neuropsicológica para medir la inteligencia: utilización del test de Retención Visual de Benton. Ph.D. thesis,
Universidad de Valladolid
40. Hastie T, Tibshirani R, Friedman JH, Friedman JH (2009) The elements of statistical learning: data mining, inference, and prediction,
vol 2. Springer
41. Heckman JJ, Kautz T (2012) Hard evidence on soft skills. Labour
Econ 19(4):451–464

123

6196
42. Higgins N, Rathner JA, Frankland S (2021) Development of selfregulated learning: a longitudinal study on academic performance
in undergraduate science. Research in Science and Technological
Education. https://doi.org/10.1080/02635143.2021.1997978
43. Hinton GE (1990) Connectionist learning procedures. In: Machine
learning, Volume III, pp 555–610. Elsevier
44. Hodara M, Lewis K (2017) How well does high school grade point
average predict college performance by student urbanicity and timing of college entry. National Center for Education Evaluation and
Regional Assistance, REL, p 250
45. Hoerl AE, Kennard RW (1970) Ridge regression: Biased estimation
for nonorthogonal problems. Technometrics 12(1):55–67. https://
doi.org/10.1080/00401706.1970.10488634
46. Hoffman D (2021) The APS and undergraduate performance in
construction economics in south africa. Lect Notes Netw Syst
269:232–240. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80000-0_28
47. Holm S (1979) A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, pp 65–70
48. Issah I, Appiah O, Appiahene P, Inusah F (2023) A systematic
review of the literature on machine learning application of determining the attributes influencing academic performance. Decision
Analytics Journal, pp 100204
49. John OP, Naumann LP, Soto CJ (2008) Paradigm shift to the integrative big five trait taxonomy. Handbook of Personality: Theory
and Research 3:114–158
50. Kori K, Pedaste M, Tõnisson E, Palts T, Altin, H, Rantsus R, Sell R,
Murtazin K, Rüütmann T (2015) First-year dropout in ict studies,
pp 437 – 445. https://doi.org/10.1109/EDUCON.2015.7096008
51. Laidra K, Pullmann H, Allik J (2007) Personality and intelligence as predictors of academic achievement: A cross-sectional
study from elementary to secondary school. Pers Individ Differ
42(3):441–451. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2006.08.001
52. Li H, XU J, CHEN J, FAN Y, (2015) A reliability meta-analysis for
44 items big five inventory: Based on the reliability generalization
methodology. Adv Psychol Sci 23(5):755. https://doi.org/10.3724/
SP.J.1042.2015.00755
53. López-García, A., Blasco-Blasco, O., Liern-García, M., ParadaRico, S.E.: Early detection of students’ failure using Machine
Learning techniques. Oper Res Perspect 11:100,292 (2023)
54. López-Zambrano J, Lara JA, Romero C (2020) Towards portability
of models for predicting students’ final performance in university
courses starting from moodle logs. Appl Sci 10(1):354. https://doi.
org/10.3390/app10010354
55. Lundberg S (2019) Shap (shapley additive explanations). https://
github.com/slundberg/shap
56. Lundberg SM, Lee SI (2017) Consistent feature attribution for tree
ensembles. arXiv:1706.06060
57. Lundberg SM, Lee SI (2017) A unified approach to interpreting
model predictions. In: Advances in neural information processing
systems, pp 4765–4774
58. MacCann C, Jiang Y, Brown LE, Double KS, Bucich M, Minbashian A (2020) Emotional intelligence predicts academic performance: A meta-analysis. Psychol Bull 146(2):150. https://doi.
org/10.1037/bul0000219
59. MacKay DJ et al (1994) Bayesian nonlinear modeling for the prediction competition. ASHRAE Trans 100(2):1053–1062
60. Mammadov S (2022) Big Five personality traits and academic performance: A meta-analysis. J Personal 90(2):222–255. https://doi.
org/10.1111/jopy.12663
61. Mann HB, Whitney DR (1947) On a test of whether one of two random variables is stochastically larger than the other. The annals of
mathematical statistics, pp 50–60. https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/
1177730491
62. OECD (2022) Education at a glance 2022. https://www.oecd.org/
education/education-at-a-glance/

123

J. R. Rico-Juan et al.
63. Ortiz-Lozano JM, Rua-Vieites A, Bilbao-Calabuig P, Casadesús-Fa
M (2018) University student retention: Best time and data to identify undergraduate students at risk of dropout. Innov Educ Teach
Int 57(1):74–85. https://doi.org/10.1080/14703297.2018.1502090
64. Panadero E (2017) A review of self-regulated learning: Six models
and four directions for research. Frontiers in psychology, pp 422.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00422
65. Parkavi R, Karthikeyan P et al (2023) Predicting academic performance of learners with the three domains of learning data using
neuro-fuzzy model and machine learning algorithms. Journal of
Engineering Research
66. Pelima LR, Sukmana Y, Rosmansyah Y (2024) Predicting university student graduation using academic performance and machine
learning: a systematic literature review. IEEE Access
67. Pentreath N (2015) Machine learning with spark. Packt Publishing
Ltd
68. Pérez E, Medrano LA (2013) Teorías contemporáneas de la
inteligencia: Una revisión crítica de la literatura. PSIENCIA:
Revista Latinoamericana de Ciencia Psicológica 5(2):6
69. Pérez-González JC, Filella G, Soldevila A, Faiad Y, Sanchez-Ruiz
MJ (2022) Integrating self-regulated learning and individual differences in the prediction of university academic achievement across
a three-year-long degree. Metacognition Learn 17(3):1141–1165.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11409-022-09315-w
70. Poropat AE (2009) A meta-analysis of the five-factor model of
personality and academic performance. Psychol Bull 135(2):322.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0014996
71. Quinn RJ, Gray G (2020) Prediction of student academic performance using Moodle data from a Further Education setting. Irish
Journal of Technology Enhanced Learning 5(1). https://doi.org/10.
22554/ijtel.v5i1.57
72. Rafiola R, Setyosari P, Radjah C, Ramli M (2020) The effect of
learning motivation, self-efficacy, and blended learning on students’ achievement in the industrial revolution 4.0. Int J Emerg
Technol Learn (iJET) 15(8):71–82. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.
v15i08.12525
73. Reed SK (2012) Cognition: Theories and applications. CENGAGE
learning
74. Richardson M, Abraham C, Bond R (2012) Psychological correlates of university students’ academic performance: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Psychol Bull 138(2):353. https://doi.org/
10.1037/a0026838
75. Rivers DJ (2021) The role of personality traits and online academic
self-efficacy in acceptance, actual use and achievement in Moodle.
Education and Information Technologies, pp 1–26. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10639-021-10478-3
76. Roth AE (1988) The Shapley value: essays in honor of Lloyd
S. Cambridge University Press, Shapley. https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511528446
77. Schaufeli WB, Martinez IM, Pinto AM, Salanova M, Bakker AB
(2002) Burnout and engagement in university students: A crossnational study. Journal of cross-cultural psychology 33(5):464–
481. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022022102033005003
78. Schaufeli WB, Salanova M, González-Romá V, Bakker AB (2022)
The measurement of engagement and burnout: A two sample confirmatory factor analytic approach. J Happiness Stud 3:71–92.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1015630930326
79. Segura M, Mello J, Hernández A (2022) machine learning prediction of university student dropout: does preference play a key role.
Mathematics 10(18):3359. https://doi.org/10.3390/math10183359
80. Stapor K, Ksieniewicz, P, Garcia S, Woźniak M (2021) How
to design the fair experimental classifier evaluation. Applied
Soft Computing, pp 107219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2021.
107219
81. Sternberg RJ (1990) Metaphors of mind: Conceptions of the nature
of intelligence. Cambridge University Press

Study regarding the influence of a student’s personality and an LMS usage profile...
82. Tavakol M, Dennick R (2011) Making sense of Cronbach’s alpha.
Int J Med Educ 2:53
83. Terzis V, Moridis CN, Economides AA (2012) How student’s
personality traits affect Computer Based Assessment Acceptance:
Integrating BFI with CBAAM. Comput Hum Behav 28(5):1985–
1996. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2012.05.019
84. Tibshirani R (1996) Regression Shrinkage and Selection via the
Lasso. J R Stat Soc: Series B (Methodol) 58(1):267–288. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1996.tb02080.x
85. Tipping ME (2001) Sparse bayesian learning and the relevance
vector machine. J Mach Learn Res 1(Jun):211–244. https://doi.
org/10.1162/15324430152748236
86. Vedel A (2014) The Big Five and tertiary academic performance: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. Pers Individ Differ 71:66–76.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.PAID.2014.07.011
87. Vera M, Cortés JA (2021) Emotional and cognitive aptitudes and
successful academic performance: using the ecct. Int J Environ Res
Public Health 18(24). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph182413184
88. Vossensteyn JJ, Kottmann A, Jongbloed BW, Kaiser F, Cremonini
L, Stensaker B, Hovdhaugen E, Wollscheid S (2015). Dropout and
completion in higher education in Europe: Main report. https://doi.
org/10.2766/826962
89. Webster BJ, Yang M (2012) Transition, induction and goal achievement: first-year experiences of hong kong undergraduates. Asia
Pac Educ Rev 13(2):359–368. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12564011-9185-6
90. Weisberg S (2005) Applied linear regression, vol 528. John Wiley
& Sons. https://doi.org/10.1002/0471704091

6197

91. Wilcoxon F (1945) Individual comparisons by ranking methods.
Biometrics Bull 1(6):80–83. https://doi.org/10.2307/3001968
92. Wolters CA, Hussain M (2015) Investigating grit and its relations with college students’ self-regulated learning and academic
achievement. Metacognition Learn 10:293–311. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11409-014-9128-9
93. Wu H, Li S, Zheng J, Guo J (2020) Medical students’ motivation
and academic performance: the mediating roles of self-efficacy and
learning engagement. Med Educ Online 25(1):1742,964. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10872981.2020.1742964
94. Yu X, Jiang F, Du J, Gong D (2019) A cross-domain collaborative
filtering algorithm with expanding user and item features via the
latent factor space of auxiliary domains. Pattern Recognit 94:96–
109
95. Yu X, Peng Q, Xu L, Jiang F, Du J, Gong D (2021) A selective
ensemble learning based two-sided cross-domain collaborative filtering algorithm. Inf Process & Manage 58(6):102,691
96. Yucel R, Bird FL, Young J, Blanksby T (2014) The road to selfassessment: exemplar marking before peer review develops firstyear students’ capacity to judge the quality of a scientific report.
Assess & Eval High Educ 39(8):971–986. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02602938.2014.880400

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

123

