            sustainability

Article
Students’ Academic Performance and Engagement Prediction in
a Virtual Learning Environment Using Random Forest with
Data Balancing
Khurram Jawad 1, *, Muhammad Arif Shah 2 and Muhammad Tahir 1, *

                                          1   College of Computing and Informatics, Saudi Electronic University, Riyadh 11673, Saudi Arabia
                                          2   Department of IT & Computer Science, Pak-Austria Fachhochshule Institute of Applied
                                              Sciences & Technology, Haripur 22650, Pakistan
                                          *   Correspondence: k.allo@seu.edu.sa (K.J.); m.tahir@seu.edu.sa (M.T.)


                                          Abstract: Virtual learning environment (VLE) is vital in the current age and is being extensively used
                                          around the world for knowledge sharing. VLE is helping the distance-learning process, however, it
                                          is a challenge to keep students engaged all the time as compared to face-to-face lectures. Students
                                          do not participate actively in academic activities, which affects their learning curves. This study
                                          proposes the solution of analyzing students’ engagement and predicting their academic performance
                                          using a random forest classifier in conjunction with the SMOTE data-balancing technique. The Open
                                          University Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD) was used in the study to simulate the teaching–
                                          learning environment. Data from six different time periods was noted to create students’ profiles
                                          comprised of assessments scores and engagements. This helped to identify early weak points and
                                          preempted the students performance for improvement through profiling. The proposed methodology
                                          demonstrated 5% enhanced performance with SMOTE data balancing as opposed to without using it.
Citation: Jawad, K.; Shah, M.A.;          Similarly, the AUC under the ROC curve is 0.96, which shows the significance of the proposed model.
Tahir, M. Students’ Academic
Performance and Engagement                Keywords: student academic performance; virtual learning environment; random forest; SMOTE
Prediction in a Virtual Learning
Environment Using Random Forest
with Data Balancing. Sustainability
2022, 14, 14795. https://doi.org/         1. Introduction
10.3390/su142214795
                                                E-Learning systems confront a plethora of challenges but the most considerable of
Academic Editor: Hao-Chiang               them is the lack of students’ interest in a variety of activities. In this scenario, if students’
Koong Lin                                 engagements and academic performance are predicted, it will help to achieve the basic
                                          purpose of distance learning. In a virtual learning environment (VLE), a ginormous amount
Received: 25 September 2022
                                          of data is produced by the participation of students every day. This trove of data can be
Accepted: 1 November 2022
                                          utilized for student profiling as well as generating trends and hidden patterns. The focus
Published: 9 November 2022
                                          of this study is to predict the academic performance and engagement of students in VLEs
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral      through student profiling using artificial-intelligence and machine-learning techniques.
with regard to jurisdictional claims in   The freely available Open University Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD) is used for
published maps and institutional affil-   this purpose. In the initial stages, students’ course information is taken from VLEs, which
iations.
                                          is preprocessed and cleansed. Our built models are trained on the extracted information
                                          and tested on new data that will end up in model evaluation. The model evaluation and
                                          building is conducted iteratively until the best performance is revealed.
                                                Information-communications-technology (ICT)-based tools have made VLEs more
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
                                          reliable and, therefore, more universities are now offering online education. Particularly,
This article is an open access article
                                          due to COVID-19, higher education institutions in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
distributed under the terms and           around the world have shifted their course offerings to e-learning.
conditions of the Creative Commons              In order to guide analytics in the e-learning paradigm, it is important to have tech-
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://     niques that can provide true analysis of the generated data from students’ interactions with
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/          the system. Students’ interactions can be revealed and associated with their performance
4.0/).




Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795. https://doi.org/10.3390/su142214795                                    https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795                                                                                            2 of 15




                                 on a particular course. The primary objective of the proposed model is to predict stu-
                                 dents’ academic performance and their engagement in various activities through students’
                                 profiling in VLE using random forest and data balancing.
                                       In an e-learning environment, students usually do not take an interest in assessment
                                 and learning activities. The proposed model will be used to increase the participation level
                                 of students by letting them know about their projected performance in advance. Particularly,
                                 it will help students improve their academic performance through active participation in
                                 academic activities. Development of such models will certainly be useful in identifying
                                 social, environment and behavioral factors affecting students’ overall performance in
                                 e-learning environments.
                                       The primary contributions of this article include the following:
                                 1.   We construct students’ profiles by combining their assessment scores and engagement
                                      with a VLE.
                                 2.   We utilize random forest in conjunction with a data-balancing technique to predict
                                      the students’ academic performance from their profiles.
                                 3.   We investigate the performance of our proposed model by exploiting data from six
                                      different intervals, including the data for first 120 days, 150 days, 180 days, 210 days,
                                      230 days, and 260 days.

                                 2. Related Work
                                       Traditional education and computer-based education are the two educational environ-
                                 ments in practice today across academia, where the latter is well-known as e-learning [1].
                                 Educational institutions around the world are now rapidly moving towards e-learning, with
                                 novel learning strategies that can help improve learning methodologies [2]. Innovation in
                                 information and communication technology tools have played a critical role in the growth
                                 of web-based teaching and learning processes [3], particularly in the post-COVID-19 sce-
                                 nario. E-learning systems have not only become an integral part of teaching over the web
                                 but also play a fundamental role in aiding face-to-face student–teacher sessions [4]. Transi-
                                 tion from traditional learning environments to e-learning environments has created many
                                 challenges, particularly the lack of interest of the students, which affects their academic
                                 performance. Therefore, it is of the utmost importance to develop techniques which can
                                 identify reasons and forecast students’ projected performance. To achieve this, a number of
                                 studies [5–10] have been conducted in the recent past to explore the e-learning domain.
                                       Ghassen Ben Brahim [11] extracted an 86-dimensional feature space where only in-
                                 formative features were exploited by various machine-learning algorithms to categorize a
                                 student as an academically low performer or high performer. The author evaluated the
                                 performance of the proposed methodology under three different experimental scenarios
                                 and obtained a 97.4% accuracy using a random-forest classifier.
                                       Nikola et al. [12] employed various machine-learning algorithms to analyze the perfor-
                                 mance of their proposed approach. The authors addressed the problem of exam prediction
                                 both as classification and regression tasks. In the case of classification, the students were
                                 identified either as “pass” or “fail” where, as in case of regression, the actual score of
                                 the student exam was predicted. Similarly, Sekeroglu et al. [13] analyzed the Student
                                 Performance Dataset and Students Academic Performance Dataset using a number of
                                 machine-learning algorithms where the former dataset was used for prediction and the
                                 latter for classification. Burgos [14] took students’ online activities into account to predict
                                 their performance while using an e-learning system. The author categorized students based
                                 on their learning styles using the data obtained from their log-in history and learning man-
                                 agement system from the Sakai platform [15]. Prior to classification, preprocessing, feature
                                 selection and parameter optimization was performed. This type of categorization will help
                                 to predict students’ performance in a particular course. Another study [16] showed that
                                 machine-learning techniques can effectively use historical grades of a student to predict
                                 their final grades. A dashboard was designed to forecast students’ performance in real
                                 time which may help prevent students from making premature decisions about dropping
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795                                                                                           3 of 15




                                 out. In another study [17], machine-learning techniques were used to predict students’
                                 engagement from their behavioral features and analyze its effect on assessment grades.
                                 Instructors can easily identify low-engagement students with the help of a dashboard that
                                 displays students’ activities in the learning environment. An adaptive gamified learning
                                 system [18] was developed which utilizes educational data mining with gamification and
                                 adaptation techniques to increase the engagement of students in the learning environment
                                 and, consequently, their performance. The effectiveness of gamification against adaptive
                                 gamification was analyzed in the e-learning environment. Sana et al. [19] utilized three
                                 classifiers to develop a framework for the prediction of students’ performance. The authors
                                 preprocessed the data collected from a Kalboard 360 online-learning management system
                                 by removing less important and redundant features. Next, they performed feature selection
                                 and analysis to identify the most discriminative features. Finally, classification algorithms
                                 were used to predict the students’ performance. They reported the performance using
                                 accuracy, precision, recall and F-measure. Abubakar and Ahmad [20] used a random forest
                                 algorithm to predict student performance based on their interaction with an e-learning
                                 system and assessment marks. They also identified significant attributes, among others that
                                 were observed, to be more useful in performance prediction. The literature revealed that
                                 machine-learning algorithms can play a very crucial role in enhancing students’ interest
                                 in e-learning environments. Forecasting the results of students will encourage them to
                                 complete their courses. This is due to the fact that students usually drop a course based on
                                 their false assumption of failing the course. In this work, we will analyze the performance of
                                 a random-forest algorithm in combination with SMOTE data balancing for its effectiveness
                                 in predicting students’ projected performance.
                                      The rest of the article is structured as follows. Section 3 describes the dataset, data-
                                 collection process, data cleansing, model-building process, and evaluation measures.
                                 Section 4 explains the experimental setup. Section 5 highlights the obtained results. Section 7
                                 concludes the article.

                                 3. Materials and Methods
                                 3.1. Dataset
                                       Open University Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD) [21] contains data about
                                 courses, students, and the interactions of those students with the VLE. As mentioned
                                 in the original documentation of this data, there are total of 7 recorded modules denoted
                                 as AAA, BBB, CCC, DDD, EEE, FFF, and GGG. The courses were offered in February and
                                 October, respectively, denoted as B and J, where the February semesters are usually 20 days
                                 shorter than the October semesters. The data for courses CCC, EEE, and GGG are not
                                 available for the years 2013 and 2014.
                                       The dataset was developed from data of 22 modules taught at the Open University
                                 which contains not only the demographic data of 32,593 students but also the aggregated
                                 data of their assessment results and clickstreams in the form of their interactions with
                                 the university VLE. The clickstream data is logged as daily summaries which consist of
                                 10,655,280 entries. Figure 1 illustrates the database schema of the utilized dataset i.e.,
                                 OULAD which shows student demographics, student activities, and module presentation
                                 with detailed data attributes and data types. The dataset is student-centric rather than
                                 course-centric. The “courses” relation contains data about course name (code_module), the
                                 year and semester in which it is offered (code_presentation), and the length of the module
                                 presentation in number of days (length). The ”assessments” relation has information about
                                 assessments conducted in a given module presentation. In each course module, there are
                                 assessments and a final exam. Total weight of the exams and other assessments is 100 each.
                                 However, in some courses, only exams are weighted such as course GGG. Similarly, all
                                 computer-marked assessments (CMAs) are on the same date in course GGG. Another
                                 interesting fact about course GGG is that the first assessment is after 60 days, whereas in
                                 all other courses it is during the first 30 days. The “VLE” relation contains information
                                 about all the resources accessible to the students in the VLE which are usually pdf files
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795                                                                                             4 of 15




                                 and html pages. Studets’ interactions with these online resources are recorded as resource
                                 identification number (id_site), code_module, code_presentation, activity_type, the week
                                 from which the material is scheduled to be used (week_from), and week until which the
                                 resource is scheduled to be used (week_to). The demographics of students are provided in
                                 the “studentInfo” relation. The “studentRegistration” table contains information about the
                                 registration time of a course presentation. The date of unregistration is also found here. The
                                 “studentAssessment” relation has the results of the students’ submitted assessments. The
                                 value of score field in this relation ranges from 0–100, where the passing score is 40 or above.
                                      Figure 2 highlights the gender-wise distribution of students.




                                 Figure 1. Open University Learning Analytics Dataset Schema [21].




                                 Figure 2. Gender-wise distribution of students in OULAD dataset.
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795                                                                                           5 of 15




                                 3.2. Data Collection
                                      The OULAD dataset, as mentioned in Section 3.1, was utilized in this research, and rep-
                                 resents the data of more than 200,000 enrolled students in European Open University [17].
                                 The dataset consists of sciences, technology, engineering, and mathematics (broadly repre-
                                 senting STEM). Module-wise student categories can be seen in Table 1.

                                 Table 1. Dataset Summary.

                                    Module          AAA       BBB        CCC        DDD         EEE        FFF        GGG
                                                   Social     Social                                                  Social
                                    Domain                               STEM       STEM       STEM        STEM
                                                  Sciences   Sciences                                                Sciences
                                  Presentations       2          4         2          4           3          4           3
                                    Students        748        7909      4434       6272        2934       7762        2534


                                      Its VLE is composed of the course material, course lectures and assessments. Students
                                 can interact with each other, work on assignments, watch lecture videos and use materials
                                 on VLE while the recorded videos of students interaction can be found in the log files [17].
                                 The information of these students were tabulated as 7 modules such as student registration,
                                 subjects, students VLE, students VLE, VLE itself, and assessments [22].
                                      The students activities are recorded in the log-file with timing based on their clicks to
                                 indicate how much time was spent on a specific activity. Students’ discussion is included as
                                 forum variable which indicates a space where students can upload their queries and obtain
                                 replies [17]. The very first screen of each subject is represented by variable HomePage.
                                 The details about Open University and acronyms of higher education are kept in glossary.
                                 Relation between the dataset tables is as shown in Figure 1.

                                 3.3. Methodology
                                       The mechanics of our proposed research model to achieve the aim can be seen in
                                 Figure 3. The objective of the proposed methodology is to assess the students’ academic
                                 performance and predict engagement with the VLE which will ultimately help in predicting
                                 the final results of the students. The students’ academic performance can be computed
                                 from the scores whereas the engagement with the VLE can be measured from the number
                                 of clicks on the course-specific online resources.




                                 Figure 3. Our proposed research mechanics.

                                       In order to anlyse the students’ performance and engagement with the VLE, we
                                 utilized average score of a student’s assessment within the first number of days from
                                 the start of the semester and average number of clicks by a student while accessing each
                                 resource category within the first number of days from the start of the semester. In order to
                                 form the final feature vector, the two features were combined with other profile information.
                                 In this process, the students who withdrew from a course within the first number of days
                                 from the start of the semester were grouped with the Fail students. During this process,
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795                                                                                          6 of 15




                                 the students were categorized as Fail and Pass. Note that “distinction” as a result was also
                                 replaced by Pass. The withdrawn cases were also grouped with the Fail since the students
                                 withdrew from those courses due to their poor performance.

                                 3.3.1. Data Pre-Processing
                                      It was necessary to perform data preprocessing before applying predictive modeling.
                                 The data preprocessing includes dealing with inconsistent data, eliminating data noise and
                                 imputing missing values through a variety of techniques and strategies. We performed
                                 these preprocessing techniques to get the data ready for model application, including
                                 creating or changing attributes and selecting the required data object [23,24].
                                      The students’ profiles were built from “assessments”, “studentAssessment”, “stu-
                                 dentVle”, and “vle” tables putting together student information and the relevant site. All
                                 the sites reside in the “vle” table with their ids and types (homepage, content, glossary,
                                 subpage, forum, URL, etc.).
                                      The student’s score-related information was extracted from the “assessments” and
                                 “studentAssessment” tables, which include the course name (code_module), the offered
                                 year and semester (code_presentation), the student identification number (id_student),
                                 and average score over all assessments for each student over the first number of days
                                 (mean_score_day120, i.e., 120 days in this case). Likewise, the student’s engagement with
                                 VLE-related information was extracted from “studentVle” and “vle” relations, which in-
                                 clude course name (code_module), the offered year and semester (code_presentation),
                                 student identification number (id_student), and the resources accessed (i.e., dataplus, dual-
                                 pane, externalquiz, forumng, glossary, homepage, htmlactivity, oucollaborate, oucontent,
                                 ouelluminate, ouwiki, page, questionnaire, quiz, repeatactivity, resource, sharedsubpage,
                                 subpage, and url).
                                      The students’ interaction activities were calculated on different levels which depended
                                 on the number of days we considered for model development. We considered 120 days,
                                 150 days, 180 days, 210 days, 230 days, and 260 days of activities to predict the final
                                 performance of the students while utilizing their engagement level. The engagement
                                 represents the students motivation level until the day of prediction. Engagement is the most
                                 impactful feature for performance prediction.
                                      The number of students distributed in the original dataset without preprocessing is
                                 shown in Figure 4.




                                 Figure 4. Distribution of the final results in 4 categories.

                                      According to this distribution, the number of students passing the course, considering
                                 both simply pass and pass with distinction, is 15,385 whereas the number of students who
                                 are not successful is 17,208 (considering both the withdrawn and fail students), as shown
                                 in Figure 5.
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795                                                                                          7 of 15




                                 Figure 5. Distribution of the final results in 2 categories.

                                    The input to the machine-learning algorithm was a 30-dimensional feature vector
                                 comprising of students’ assessment scores and their engagement statistics with the VLE.

                                 3.3.2. Build and Test the Predictive Model
                                      There were a number of AI algorithms used to check their impact and capabilities in
                                 predicting the academic performance of students with respect to their profiling. We utilized
                                 random-forest classifier and, for the sake of comparison, used XGBoost classifier [25] and
                                 logistic regression as well.
                                      A number of studies have used various AI algorithms in academic performance
                                 prediction. According to Wolpert and Macready [26], no AI classification algorithms can
                                 show better results than every other available for each problem domain. Hence, commonly
                                 adopted algorithms were taken into consideration for iteration and benchmarking to
                                 identify the best algorithm for the student-performance prediction task.
                                      However, the computation time for training AI algorithms optimally was a bigger
                                 challenge, as there were six considered intervals.

                                 3.4. Evaluation Measures
                                     This section describes the performance parameters that are used in this article to
                                 evaluate the performance of our proposed models.

                                 3.4.1. Accuracy
                                      Accuracy is the prominent and most common quality-evaluation metric used in this
                                 study, as given in Equation (1).

                                                         Accuracy = ( TP + TN )/( TP + FP + TN + FN )                      (1)
                                      This basically indicates the total number of all possible correct predictions divided by
                                 the total number of samples in the dataset used, where 0 is termed as the worst accuracy
                                 and 1 as the best accuracy. Note that TP, FP, TN, and FN refer to the number of true
                                 positives, false positives, true negatives, and false negatives.

                                 3.4.2. Receiver Operating Characteristic
                                      Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) measures the prediction quality of a classifier
                                 especially in binary-class classification problems. ROC curve is obtained by plotting true-
                                 positive and false-positive rates along Y and X axes, respectively. In order to obtain ideal
                                 ROC curve, it is important to minimize false-positive rate while maximizing the true-
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795                                                                                                   8 of 15




                                 positive rate. ROC curve estimates the trade off between true- and false-positive rates for a
                                 model using various probability threshold values ranging from 0.0 to 1.0.
                                      True-positive rate, or sensitivity, describes the quality of the model at predicting the
                                 positive class and is given by Equation (2).

                                                              TruePositiveRate = TP/( TP + FN )                                     (2)

                                      The FP rate or false-alarm rate describes how many times the model predicted the
                                 positive class when the actual output is negative. It is given by Equation (3)

                                                              FalsePositiveRate = FP/( FP + TN )                                    (3)

                                 3.4.3. Precision–Recall Curve
                                      Precision–recall curve estimates the trade off between TP rate and positive predicted
                                 value for a model on various probability thresholds. It is considered a suitable measure in
                                 the presence of imbalanced data.
                                      Precision refers to the quality of a model at predicting positive class and is obtained
                                 using Equation (4).
                                                                 Precision = TP/( TP + FP)                                 (4)
                                      Recall is obtained using Equation (5).

                                                                    Recall = TP/( TP + FN )                                         (5)

                                 4. Experimental Setup
                                       In this article, each set was generated by varying the number of days during which the
                                 students’ performance and the final result were evaluated. Fewer number of days indicate
                                 that less information was available, whereas larger number of days signifies the availability
                                 of more information about students. During each set of experiments, the data was divided
                                 in training and testings sets where 67% data was reserved for training and 33% was kept
                                 for testing. The best combination of parameters was obtained using RandomizedSearchCV
                                 method with RandomForestClassifier. The data was scaled using the StandardScaler()
                                 method of sklearn library.

                                 5. Results
                                 5.1. Performance Analysis of Random-Forest Classifier with Random Search Optimization
                                      Table 2 highlights the performance of the random-forest classifier in terms of training
                                 and testing accuracy values, ROC-AUC, precision–recall AUC, and F1 -score.

                                 Table 2. Performance accuracy of the proposed technique using the random-forest classifier.

                                                                                  Random Forest
                                                   Training        Testing
                                      Days                                      ROC-AUC       Precision–Recall AUC      F1 Score
                                                   Accuracy       Accuracy
                                       120           90.7           76.3           0.796              0.857               83.1
                                       150            1.0           78.2           0.820              0.895               84.7
                                       180           98.9           81.3           0.861              0.926               87.3
                                       210            1.0           81.1           0.854              0.923               87.2
                                       230            1.0           83.4           0.871              0.936               88.9
                                       260           97.8           84.2           0.894              0.950               89.8


                                      It is evident from the results in Table 2 that the performance of the classifier is enhanced
                                 with the increase in the engagement and score information of students to train the classifier.
                                 The highest accuracy is 84.2% when 260 days of data was used for training. Similarly, the
                                 values of area under the curves of ROC as well as precision–recall curves are higher for
                                 260 days data as shown in Figures 6 and 7, respectively. F1 score is also higher for the same
                                 number of days.
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795                                                                                                        9 of 15




                                             The obtained data for each of the number of days is highly imbalanced. Therefore,
                                        we used the SMOTE oversampling technique [27] in conjunction with the random-forest
                                        classifier using 260 days of profiling information. The training accuracy is 100% whereas
                                        the testing accuracy is 89.2%. As evident from Table 2, due to balancing the data, the testing
                                        accuracy is enhanced by 5%, which shows the significance of data balancing in predicting
                                        the students’ academic performance. The ROC curve is employed to select the appropriate
                                        values of decision thresholds to establish a trade off between true- and false-positive rates
                                        across each of the six time periods. The ROC curve presented in Figure 8 achieved the
                                        AUC score of 0.96.




                                 (a) ROC curve for data of 120 days              (b) ROC curve for data of 150 days




                                 (c) ROC curve for data of 180 days              (d) ROC curve for data of 210 days




                                 (e) ROC curve for data of 230 days               (f) ROC curve for data of 260 days

                                        Figure 6. ROC plots of different days of data using fandom-forest classifier without SMOTE.
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795                                                                                                        10 of 15




                         (a) Precision–recall curve for data of 120 days     (b) Precision–recall curve for data of 150 days




                         (c) Precision–recall curve for data of 180 days     (d) Precision–recall curve for data of 210 days




                         (e) Precision–recall curve for data of 230 days     (f) Precision–recall curve for data of 260 days

                                      Figure 7. Precision-recall curves for data of different durations using random-forest classifier.




                                      Figure 8. ROC curve for data of 260 days with random forest and SMOTE.
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795                                                                                           11 of 15




                                     Precision–recall curves were also utilized to assess the performance of the proposed
                                 model. The precision–recall curve computed using balanced data is illustrated in Figure 9
                                 where the AUC value is 0.957 and F1 -score value is 89.2.




                                 Figure 9. Precision–recall curve for data of 260 days with random forest and SMOTE.

                                      Here, the precision–recall curve indicates the trade off between precision and recall
                                 for various threshold values. The AUC value of 0.957 indicates high precision and recall
                                 values. In the current problem, high precision shows the correct identification of failed
                                 students whereas high recall signifies the correct prediction of pass students. The proposed
                                 system produced accurate results as an indication of high precision and also achieved the
                                 majority of all pass students an an indication of high recall.

                                 5.2. Performance Analysis of Logistic Regression and XGBoost Classifiers for 260 Days Data
                                      In order to provide further insight, we also performed experiments using logistic
                                 regression, which achieved training and testing accuracy values of 80.4% and 80.9%, re-
                                 spectively. The AUC under the ROC curve is also 0.831, which is shown in Figure 10.




                                 Figure 10. ROC curve for data of 260 days using logistic regression.
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795                                                                                        12 of 15




                                     We also constructed the precision–recall curve as shown in Figure 11, where the AUC
                                 under the precision–recall curve is 0.912 and F1 score is 87.5.




                                 Figure 11. Precision–recall curve for data of 260 days using logistic regression.

                                      Similarly, the XGBoost classifier was also employed to see its behaviour on the data
                                 consisting of 260 days score and engagement statistics. The obtained training and testing
                                 accuracy values are, respectively, 91.7% and 84.3%. The AUC under the ROC curve is 0.887,
                                 as shown in Figure 12.




                                 Figure 12. ROC curve for data of 260 days.

                                      The AUC under the precision–recall curve is 0.946, which is also depicted in Figure 13,
                                 and the F1 score is 89.7.
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795                                                                                        13 of 15




                                 Figure 13. Precision–recall curve for data of 260 days.

                                 6. Discussion
                                      In this article, we investigated the effect of students’ engagement with a VLE on their
                                 final results. It is observed from the obtained results that the students’ engagement with
                                 the VLE plays important role in predicting their final results. It indicates that day-to-day
                                 engagement with the VLE is of higher importance compared to the students’ personal
                                 information. The proposed model demonstrated that the effectiveness of engagement
                                 information is enhanced by adding data for a higher number of days. That is why the infor-
                                 mation for 260 days enabled the proposed system to demonstrate enhanced performance.
                                 The proposed random-forest-based model can inform the students about their probable
                                 failure in a course and guide them towards success. It is possible to identify an individual
                                 facing risk of failure; however, the currently proposed work can classify them as group
                                 due to the binary nature of the problem under consideration. Consequently, the privacy of
                                 individuals is maintained yet the accurate prediction of the entire class can help teachers
                                 take appropriate measures to enhance the overall performance of the students.
                                      The trend shows better values towards the day end than from the beginning as
                                 more data is provided to the AI algorithm. It can be well-predicted from the trend that
                                 performances increase almost at the same pace as they start. Early information can help
                                 science students have the chance to improve their performances towards the end of course
                                 and before the examination. Connected to this, instructors are advised to execute the model
                                 150 days after the commencement of the course to identify the students at risk of failure.

                                 7. Conclusions
                                       In this work, we analyzed students’ academic performance and their engagement with
                                 a VLE using random forest in combination with SMOTE. First, the students’ profile were
                                 developed from the OULAD dataset, which was then used to train a random-forest classifier.
                                       The obtained results revealed the significant performance of the random-forest classi-
                                 fier in predicting the students’ academic performance. Data from six different time periods
                                 were identified and it is observed that the performance of random forest with SMOTE
                                 oversampling is better for the time period of 260 days, which was almost end of the course
                                 presentation. This is due to the fact that, towards the end of the academic session, more
                                 data on the students engagement and assessments’ score is available and more accurate
                                 predictions are possible.
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795                                                                                                      14 of 15




                                       Such analyses of students’ profiles in the context of a VLE are helpful in identifying
                                   weaknesses towards the successful completion of academic session. This will certainly help
                                   academicians help students preemptively and lead them to a successful end of their studies.

                                   Author Contributions: Conceptualization, K.J. and M.A.S.; methodology, M.T. and M.A.S.; vali-
                                   dation, K.J., M.A.S. and M.T.; formal analysis, M.A.S.; investigation, M.T. and M.A.S.; resources,
                                   K.J. and M.A.S.; data curation, M.T. and M.A.S.; writing—original draft preparation, K.J., M.T. and
                                   M.A.S.; writing—review and editing, K.J. and M.A.S.; visualization, M.T. and M.A.S.; supervision,
                                   M.T.; project administration, K.J.; funding acquisition, K.J. All authors have read and agreed to the
                                   published version of the manuscript.
                                   Funding: The authors extend their appreciation to the Deputyship for Research & Innovation,
                                   Ministry of Education in Saudi Arabia for funding this research work through the project number 7897.
                                   Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
                                   Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
                                   Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are openly available in https://
                                   analyse.kmi.open.ac.uk/open_dataset at https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2017.171, accessed on 18
                                   May 2022, reference number 170171 (2017).
                                   Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Manjarres, A.V.; Sandoval, L.G.M.; Suárez, M.S. Data mining techniques applied in educational environments: Literature review.
      Digit. Educ. Rev. 2018, 33, 235–266. [CrossRef]
2.    Zareie, B.; Navimipour, N.J. The effect of electronic learning systems on the employee’s commitment. Int. J. Manag. Educ. 2016,
      14, 167–175. [CrossRef]
3.    Muniasamy, A.; Alasiry, A. Deep Learning: The Impact on Future eLearning. Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Learn. 2020, 15, 188–199.
      [CrossRef]
4.    Alharthi, A.D.; Spichkova, M.; Hamilton, M. Sustainability requirements for elearning systems: A systematic literature review
      and analysis. Requir. Eng. 2019, 24, 523–543. [CrossRef]
5.    Umer, R.; Susnjak, T.; Mathrani, A.; Suriadi, S. On predicting academic performance with process mining in learning analytics.
      J. Res. Innov. Teach. Learn. 2017, 10, 160–176. [CrossRef]
6.    Lu, O.H.; Huang, A.Y.; Huang, J.C.; Lin, A.J.; Ogata, H.; Yang, S.J. Applying learning analytics for the early prediction of Students’
      academic performance in blended learning. J. Educ. Technol. Soc. 2018, 21, 220–232.
7.    Widyahastuti, F.; Tjhin, V.U. Performance prediction in online discussion forum: State-of-the-art and comparative analysis.
      Procedia Comput. Sci. 2018, 135, 302–314. [CrossRef]
8.    Zhang, W.; Huang, X.; Wang, S.; Shu, J.; Liu, H.; Chen, H. Student performance prediction via online learning behavior analytics.
      In Proceedings of the 2017 International Symposium on Educational Technology (ISET), Hong Kong, China, 27–29 June 2017;
      pp. 153–157.
9.    Koutina, M.; Kermanidis, K.L. Predicting postgraduate students’ performance using machine learning techniques. In Artificial
      Intelligence Applications and Innovations; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2011; pp. 159–168.
10.   Alzahrani1, N.A.; Abdullah, M.A. Student Engagement Effectiveness in E-Learning System. Biosci. Biotechnol. Res. Commun. Spec.
      Issue Commun. Inf. Technol. 2019, 12, 208–218. [CrossRef]
11.   Brahim, G.B. Predicting Student Performance from Online Engagement Activities Using Novel Statistical Features. Arab. J. Sci.
      Eng. 2022, 10225–10243. [CrossRef]
12.   Tomasevic, N.; Gvozdenovic, N.; Vranes, S. An overview and comparison of supervised data mining techniques for student exam
      performance prediction. Comput. Educ. 2020, 143, 103676. [CrossRef]
13.   Sekeroglu, B.; Dimililer, K.; Tuncal, K. Student performance prediction and classification using machine learning algo-
      rithms. In Proceedings of the 2019 8th International Conference on Educational and Information Technology, Cambridge,
      UK, 2–4 March 2019; pp. 7–11.
14.   Burgos, D. Background similarities as a way to predict students’ Behaviour. Sustainability 2019, 11, 6883. [CrossRef]
15.   Cavus, N.; Zabadi, T. A comparison of open source learning management systems. Procedia-Soc. Behav. Sci. 2014, 143, 521–526.
      [CrossRef]
16.   Buenaño-Fernández, D.; Gil, D.; Luján-Mora, S. Application of machine learning in predicting performance for computer
      engineering students: A case study. Sustainability 2019, 11, 2833. [CrossRef]
17.   Hussain, M.; Zhu, W.; Zhang, W.; Abidi, S.M.R. Student engagement predictions in an e-learning system and their impact on
      student course assessment scores. Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 2018, 2018, 6347186. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sustainability 2022, 14, 14795                                                                                                 15 of 15




18.   Daghestani, L.F.; Ibrahim, L.F.; Al-Towirgi, R.S.; Salman, H.A. Adapting gamified learning systems using educational data mining
      techniques. Comput. Appl. Eng. Educ. 2020, 28, 568–589. [CrossRef]
19.   Sana, B.; Siddiqui, I.F.; Arain, Q.A. Analyzing students’ academic performance through educational data mining. 3C Tecnol.
      Glosas Innovación Apl. Pym 2019, 8, 402–421.
20.   Abubakar, Y.; Ahmad, N.B.H. Prediction of students’ performance in e-learning environment using random forest. Int. J. Innov.
      Comput. 2017, 7. [CrossRef]
21.   Kuzilek, J.; Hlosta, M.; Zdrahal, Z. Open university learning analytics dataset. Sci. Data 2017, 4, 170171. [CrossRef]
22.   Jiang, S.; Williams, A.; Schenke, K.; Warschauer, M.; O’dowd, D. Predicting MOOC performance with week 1 behavior. In
      Proceedings of the Educational Data Mining, London, UK, 4–7 July 2014.
23.   Baradwaj, B.K.; Pal, S. Mining educational data to analyze students’ performance. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl. 2015, 2, 63–69.
24.   Jović, A.; Brkić, K.; Bogunović, N. A review of feature selection methods with applications. In Proceedings of the 2015 38th
      International Convention on Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and Microelectronics (MIPRO), Opatija,
      Croatia, 25–29 May 2015; pp. 1200–1205.
25.   Tahir, M. Brain MRI Classification Using Gradient Boosting. In Machine Learning in Clinical Neuroimaging and Radiogenomics in
      Neuro-Oncology; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2020; pp. 294–301.
26.   Wolpert, D.H.; Macready, W.G. No free lunch theorems for optimization. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput. 1997, 1, 67–82. [CrossRef]
27.   Tahir, M.; Khan, A.; Majid, A.; Lumini, A. Subcellular localization using fluorescence imagery: Utilizing ensemble classification
      with diverse feature extraction strategies and data balancing. Appl. Soft Comput. 2013, 13, 4231–4243. [CrossRef]
