Introduction

The last decade has seen a significant amount of Open Learning
Environments (OLEs) development e.g., Massive Open Online Courses
(MOOCs), Open Educational Resources (OERs), Open Course Ware (OCW) and
open university (Yousef & Sumner, 2020). These forms of open learning
have the potential to democratize education and provide opportunities
for lifelong learning to students around the world (Tualaulelei & Green,
2022). While e-learning systems face numerous challenges, their most
crucial function is to identify students who are at risk of academic
failure and provide timely interventions to support their success. This
has resulted in large and complex datasets that are generated by various
sources of learner behavior such as how long a student spends on a
particular task, how many attempts they make, and their performance on
quizzes and tests (Araka et al., 2022). These datasets can be analyzed
to identify patterns and trends, and to gain insights into how learners
learn (Quadir, Chen & Isaias, 2020). Despite their rapid rise in
popularity, OLEs face challenges such as high rates of student failure
and inadequate support for learners who are struggling. Many learners
who enroll in OLEs do not complete the course, and even those who do
complete the course often do not get personal support and feedback
(Elmesalawy et al., 2021). This form of education also requires learners
to be self-motivated and disciplined, as they must manage their own
learning and stay on track without the structure and support of a
traditional classroom (Xie, Siau & Nah, 2020). Thus, the completion
rates for OLEs are typically very low and high failure rates in exams
that can contribute to a student being considered at-risk (Shah et al.,
2022). Moreover, at-risk students may struggle with academic performance
due to a variety of factors, such as a lack of resources, poor
attendance, or a lack of academic support which can interfere with their
academic success. One way to address these challenges is to early
prediction of at-risk students and deliver the necessary academic and
emotional support intervention (Gupta, Garg & Kumar, 2021).

There are several approaches that can be used to predict student
performance. One common approach involves using machine learning
algorithms such as decision trees, random forests, and neural networks
that can be used to build predictive models (Ehsani, Moghadas Nejad &
Hajikarimi, 2022). These models can be trained on large datasets to
identify patterns and make predictions about future performance. In
order to evaluate the effectiveness of these techniques for early
prediction of students’ academic failure, several key factors need to be
considered. These include the quality and quantity of data available,
the accuracy of the predictive models used, and the relevance of the
predictors chosen (Yağcı, 2022). This study set out to analyze OLEs logs
to reveal students who are in danger of academic failure and delivering
prompt interventions to assist them in achieving academic success. To
achieve this goal, we utilized random forest on the behavioral data
sourced from OULAD dataset, which comprises data from a Moodle-like
educational system used at Open University (Kuzilek, Hlosta & Zdrahal,
2017).

Related work

It is important to identify at-risk students early and provide them with
the appropriate resources and support to help them succeed academically
and socially. Predicting student performance using machine learning
techniques has been a topic of interest in recent years (Altabrawee, Ali
& Ajmi, 2019). Hlosta et al. (2018) suggested two activity analysis
methods: The Markov chains and General Unary Hypothesis Automaton. The
former generates a set of data-explaining rules, while the latter
produces probabilities of state transitions that indicate the
probability of a student changing their behavior based on previous
actions. However, the primary disadvantage of both methods is the
complexity of the results obtained.

Okubo, Shimada & Taniguchi (2017) introduced a system that utilizes
state transition graphs to display learning logs and predict future
learning activities and final grades. The system used data from 236
current course students and 209 past course students for prediction.
Markov chains were employed to construct the state transition and
experiments were conducted to verify prediction accuracy using ongoing
course data. Similarly, Davis et al. (2016) analyzed MOOC data from
courses with over 100,000 students using Markov chains.

Haiyang et al. (2018) developed a probabilistic model using OLEs
database and assignment deadlines to forecast student withdrawal risk.
Various OLEs types were used to extract features for each student within
a specific time frame, achieving an accuracy of 0.84 on the dataset.
Dynamic behavioral features and other characteristics were also
considered.

Alshabandar et al. (2018) utilized assignment deadlines and the VLE
database to implement a probabilistic model for dropout prediction.
Different types of VLEs were employed to extract features for each
student within a specific time interval. Additional features included
dynamic behavioral features, demographic features, and various
assignment features. The Gaussian Finite Mixture model was used for
prediction.

Dalipi, Imran & Kastrati (2018) have noted that machine learning is a
simple aspect of the process, while the feature selection from the vast
amount of data provided by MOOC platforms is the crucial and challenging
part. Due to data being presented differently across different
platforms, it is often sparse and contains many features. The authors
examined two MOOC datasets and segmented them into two categories based
on the available features. The first category pertains to
student-related features, which primarily comprise the student’s
behavioral patterns, while the second category pertains to MOOC-related
features, which describe the course and its modules. The authors contend
that although there is an abundance of data, it still lacks features
that can accurately identify not only students at risk of dropping out
but also the outcome of their performance.

Liu & Li (2017) used the k-means algorithm to cluster active and
non-active participants and then applied the Apriori algorithm to
uncover association rules for predicting course dropouts with an 80%
precision rate. Chaplot, Rhim & Kim (2015) analyzed clickstream and
sentiment data from Coursera, using sentiment analysis to predict
dropout based on sentiment scores. An artificial neural network was
used, but the interpretability of the model was limited. The analysis
was also constrained by imbalanced data.

Boyer & Veeramachaneni (2015) classified students based on their prior
enrollment behavior to predict dropouts. Logistic regression was applied
to different samples, and the weight distribution was estimated in
advance. Various classification algorithms such as decision trees, naïve
Bayes, support vector machines, and neural networks have been employed
for predicting student performance (Alturki & Alturki, 2021). Extracting
meaningful features from the dataset, such as click counts, resource
usage time, and login frequency, is crucial for accurate learning
models.

Brahim (2022) created an 86-dimensional feature space using informative
features and used multiple machine learning algorithms to classify
students as high or low performers, achieving 97.4% accuracy with a
random forest classifier.

Jawad, Shah & Tahir (2022) utilized the Open University Learning
Analytics Dataset (OULAD) to identify areas where students struggled by
analyzing assessment scores and engagement metrics. This allowed for
targeted interventions and yielded a 96% accuracy rate.

Kuzilek, Hlosta & Zdrahal (2017) employed statistical personal and
behavioral data in OLEs to predict students’ performance using a
combined neural network that analyzed both static and sequential data.
Different time-series deep neural network models were compared, with GRU
and simple RNN performing better than the more complex LSTM model. Over
80% prediction accuracy for at-risk students was achieved by the end of
the semester, validated by experiments on the OULAD dataset.

Materials and Methods

This article presented a model for early identification of students at
risk applied the random forest algorithm on behavioral data from the
Open University Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD). The following
sections will describe more details of this model.

Dataset

The OULAD (Kuzilek, Hlosta & Zdrahal, 2017), a dataset on learning
analytics from the Open University, has information on students,
courses, and their interactions with the VLE. The dataset includes seven
modules named AAA, BBB, CCC, DDD, EEE, FFF, and GGG, and the courses
were offered in February and October, represented by B and J
respectively. The February semesters are shorter than the October
semesters by 20 days. According to the data’s original documentation,
information on courses CCC, EEE, and GGG is unavailable for 2013 and
2014. Data from 22 modules instructed at the Open University was
utilized to create the dataset. It includes demographic information on
32,593 students in addition to their assessment results and interactions
with the virtual learning environment (VLE) in the form of clickstreams.
The clickstream data is recorded as daily summaries and consists of
10,655,280 entries. Figure 1 shows the database schema of the OULAD
dataset, which is used in the study. It is focused on student data
rather than course data and includes information on student
demographics, activities, and module presentation. The “courses”
relation has details on course name (code_module), the year and semester
it is offered (code_presentation), and the presentation length in days
(length). The “assessments” relation contains information on assessments
given in a particular module presentation. All courses have assessments
and a final exam, with a combined weight of 100, but in some courses,
only exams are weighted (e.g., course GGG). Course GGG also has
computer-marked assessments (CMAs) on the same date, and the first
assessment is taken after 60 days, whereas in other courses it is taken
during the first 30 days. The “VLE” relation includes information on all
resources available to students in the VLE, such as pdf files and html
pages, and records student interactions with them, including resource
identification number (id_site), code_module, code_presentation,
activity_type, and the week when the material is scheduled to be used
(week_from) and when it is scheduled to be completed (week_to). The
“studentInfo” relation provides demographic information on students,
while the “studentRegistration” relation records the registration and
unregistration dates of a course presentation. The “studentAssessment”
relation contains students’ assessment results, with a scorerange of
0–100, where a passing score is 40 or higher.

10.7717/peerj-cs.1708/fig-1

[]

Data preprocessing

To improve the accuracy of model predictions, data preprocessing is
necessary, wherein feature engineering methods are utilized. The first
method involves filling in missing values in the date column of the
assessment data using the mean number of days. The second method
involves deleting missing values in the Student Assessment data that are
relatively small in number compared to the total data. In the Student
information data, the third method involves filling in missing values in
the imd_band column with the mode since it represents a category.
Lastly, the fourth method involves deleting the week from and week to
columns in the VLE data that have almost 80% missing values.

Data merging

This stage involves merging various data frames by joining different
tables according to the database schema as shown in Fig. 1 and analysis
this data.

- Merging the student VLE table with the VLE table; this can provide us
  with an understanding of how the students interacted with VLE.

- Merging Student Registration table with courses table to investigate
  the correlation between registrations and the duration of the course.

- Merging Student Info and Student Registration tables.

- Merging Assessments table with Student Assessment table to investigate
  the correlation between student performance and assessments.

- Merging VLE data with Student Info data.

Random forest algorithm

The random forest algorithm is an ensemble learning method that combines
multiple decision trees to make predictions. It is known for its
robustness, accuracy, and ability to handle high-dimensional data with
complex relationships consists of two main steps: building the
individual decision trees and aggregating their predictions. This study
utilized the scikit-learn library’s implementation of the random forest
algorithm in Python. Then configured the hyperparameters of the random
forest, such as the number of trees, maximum depth, and the number of
features considered at each split, through a systematic tuning process
using techniques like grid search or random search. This allowed us to
optimize the model’s performance based on the specific characteristics
of OULAD dataset.

The accuracy was calculated by comparing the model’s predictions with
ground truth labels for identifying at-risk students. Specifically, we
used metrics such as precision, recall, and F1 score to evaluate the
model’s performance. These measures consider true positives, false
positives, and false negatives, providing a comprehensive assessment of
the model’s accuracy in identifying at-risk students.

Furthermore, it is crucial to validate the model’s performance using a
different dataset to assess its generalizability. This study followed a
rigorous validation process by splitting the dataset into training and
testing subsets. The model was trained on the training set and evaluated
on the testing set, which was distinct from the training data. This
approach helps to ensure that the model’s performance is not solely
optimized for the specific dataset employed in the study.

Results

One of the indicators utilized for identifying student failure is
determining if students submit assessments on time or late. There are
three types of assessments include Tutor Marked Assessment (TMA),
Computer Marked Assessment (CMA), and Exams. As shown in Fig. 2 the
percentage of late submissions categorized by the Assessment_Type
column. The data indicates that the final exam and CMA, which is a
computer marked assessment, have the highest number of late submissions,
whereas Tutor Marked Assessments have the lowest number of late
submissions, where 0 refer to late and 1 not.

10.7717/peerj-cs.1708/fig-2

[]

After analyzing seven course modules, with four falling under STEM
courses (CCC, DDD, EEE, FFF) and the remaining three under social
courses (BBB, CCC, and DDD), has revealed that the majority of late
submissions were for courses BBB, CCC, and DDD as shown in Fig. 3, where
0 refer to late and 1 not.

10.7717/peerj-cs.1708/fig-3

[]

STEM courses have a lower percentage of late submissions at 26.07%,
while social science courses have a higher percentage of late
submissions at 37.07%. According to the table description, scores below
40 are classified as failing while scores above 40 are passing. Figure 4
displays the ratio of passing and failing students, revealing that the
failure rate in STEM subjects is higher than in social sciences.

10.7717/peerj-cs.1708/fig-4

[]

Before the course began, a particular student had multiple interactions,
indicating their interest. It is reasonable to believe that if a student
is interested in a course, they will engage with its materials before
the course starts. The number of clicks made before the course starts
could be a significant factor in predicting a student’s performance. As
a result, we will calculate the number of clicks that each student made
both before and after the course started.

After analyzing the correlation between the number of clicks and
academic performance as shown in Fig. 5, it is apparent that there is a
direct association between the two. The data indicates that students who
attained a distinction had a considerably higher number of clicks than
those who received a pass grade, and there was a substantial difference
between students who failed or withdrew and those who passed with or
without distinction.

10.7717/peerj-cs.1708/fig-5

[]

After analyzing data on individuals who have earned credits, it was
discovered that those with a lower number of credits have a greater
probability of passing with distinction or passing in general,
presumably because they have to study less. In contrast, those who
withdrew have more average credits as compared to another. Figure 6
displays the connection between age and result category. The data
indicates that individuals in the age group of 0–35 have a higher rate
of failure and withdrawal compared to other age groups.

10.7717/peerj-cs.1708/fig-6

[]

Based on Fig. 7, it is apparent that individuals with no formal
education or education lower than level education have higher rates of
failure and withdrawal, while those with a post-graduate degree have the
lowest failure rate.

10.7717/peerj-cs.1708/fig-7

[]

The random forest classifier is a machine learning technique that can
perform both regression and classification tasks. It creates multiple
decision trees that are trained on different subsets of the same
training set to enhance the classification accuracy and address the
issue of over fitting (Mahboob, Irfan & Karamat, 2016). The random
forest algorithm creates K number of trees by randomly selecting
attributes without pruning. In contrast to the decision tree method,
which tests the test data on a single constructed tree, random forest
tests the test data on all the built trees and assigns the most common
output to that instance (Mishra, Kumar & Gupta, 2014). Typically, a
forest with more trees is more robust. The random forest classifier
follows this principle, producing the most accurate results when it has
a higher number of trees. Additionally, random forest can handle missing
values and categorical data, and it avoids over fitting. To measure the
purity and impurity of attributes, random forest uses the Gini index.

The Gini index is a method for selecting an attribute that measures the
impurity of an attribute in relation to a dataset’s classes. Like
entropy, the Gini index reaches its maximum value when all classes in
the dataset have equal probability. The formula for the Gini index is
defined as (Pal, 2005):

$$\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
\usepackage{amsmath}
\usepackage{wasysym}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\usepackage{amssymb}
\usepackage{amsbsy}
\usepackage{upgreek}
\usepackage{mathrsfs}
\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
\begin{document}
${\rm Gini (t)}=1- \sum \nolimits_{i = 0}^{c - 1} {\left[ {p\left( {i{\rm |}t} \right)} \right]^2}$\end{document}$$

In this article, the analysis data described in Section Material and
Method was utilized as the input for a random forest classifier to
predict student failure at an early stage illustrated in Fig. 8. Random
forest is a classification method that consists of many decision trees.
It employs bagging and feature randomness while constructing each tree
to create an independent forest of trees. By combining the predictions
of each tree, the resulting committee prediction is typically more
precise than that of any individual tree.

10.7717/peerj-cs.1708/fig-8

[]

The accuracy for early prediction of student failure using a random
forest classifier based on the OULAD dataset. The dataset was divided
into training and testing sets, with 80% of the data allocated for
training and 20% for testing. The objective here is to find features
which impact the decision whether student will fail or not, and as such,
the majority of the data will be utilized for training purposes only.
This will involve initializing a random forest model, fitting it with
the training data, and subsequently using the fitted model to predict
the outcomes of the test data. The results of this process are presented
in Table 1.

10.7717/peerj-cs.1708/table-1

The result of prediction model.

[]

                  Precision   Recall   F1-score   Support
  --------------- ----------- -------- ---------- ---------
  0               0.85        0.95     0.90       3,077
  1               0.95        0.85     0.90       3,442
  Accuracy                             0.90       6,519
  Macro avg.      0.90        0.90     0.90       6,519
  Weighted avg.   0.90        0.90     0.90       6,519

Discussion

Students who are at risk can be identified by several factors, including
low participation or attendance in classes, extracurricular activities,
or online resources, poor academic performance, missed deadlines or
assignments, a lack of communication or feedback, and symptoms of
stress, anxiety, depression, or other mental health conditions.
Additionally, lack of academic or career objectives or plans, a lack of
social or academic support networks. It can be seen from the data in
Table 1 that the proposed model achieving classification accuracy of 90%
using a Random Forests algorithm to predict students at risk suggests
that the model is performing relatively well in identifying students who
are likely to be at risk of academic failure or dropping out. The
proposed approach classifies them as a group due to the binary nature of
the problem. This means that the model treats all students who are at
risk of failure as a single group, rather than identifying each student
individually. This approach can help maintain the privacy of individual
students while still providing valuable insights to teachers and
administrators.

The purpose of this study is to predict student performance early on in
order to prevent dropouts and improve the online learning experience
through timely interventions and support. Early performance is evaluated
based on two criteria: academic performance, which is measured by
student scores, and academic engagement, which is measured by the
frequency of clicks on course content. The data shows that the number of
clicks for students who achieved a Distinction was significantly higher
than those who received a Pass grade. There was a notable difference
between students who failed or withdrew and those who passed with or
without distinction. Furthermore, determining whether students submit
assessments on time or late is critical in detecting early student
failure. The analysis of data also reveals that individuals with no
formal education or education below a certain level have higher rates of
failure and withdrawal, whereas those with a post-graduate degree have
the lowest failure rate. All of these indicators help to identify early
predicting student failure.

By accurately predicting the likelihood of success or failure for the
entire class, teachers can take appropriate measures to enhance the
overall performance of the students (Raj & Renumol, 2022). For example,
educators may provide additional feedback and resources to students who
are at risk of failure or adjust the curriculum to better meet their
needs (Nachouki & Abou Naaj, 2022). Taken together, these results
suggest that the proposed random forest model can be a valuable tool in
improving student outcomes and promoting academic success. The findings
of this study have a number of important implications for future
practice as it can help stakeholders understand and address the factors
leading to academic failure. Deploy the model in a real-world setting,
such as a school or university, to start predicting at-risk students
early and intervene accordingly.

Limitations

The model uses random forest to analyze these factors and identify
patterns that are associated with successful or unsuccessful outcomes.
It then applies these patterns to new data to make predictions about
which students are at risk of failing the course. However, it’s
important to note that the accuracy metric alone may not be enough to
fully evaluate the model’s performance (Hu, 2022). For instance, it’s
possible that the model correctly classifies a high percentage of
students who are not at risk but is not as accurate in identifying those
who are truly at risk (Tamada, Giusti & Netto, 2022). In such cases,
other metrics such as precision, recall, or F1 score may be more
informative in evaluating the model’s performance.

Additionally, it’s important to consider the context in which the model
was developed and evaluated. For example, the model may have been
trained on a particular dataset i.e., OULAD, and its accuracy may not
generalize well to other contexts or populations. Therefore, it may be
necessary to evaluate the model’s performance on new datasets and
regularly update the model with new data to ensure it remains relevant
and accurate before making decisions based on the model’s predictions.

Conclusions

Machine learning techniques can be effective in early prediction of
at-risk students by analyzing large datasets to identify patterns and
relationships among various factors that contribute to student success
or failure. The random forest algorithm has been applied on behavioral
data from the Open University Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD) to
predict student performance. The dataset was divided into training and
testing sets, with 80% of the data used for training and 20% for
testing. The objective is to identify the key features that influence
student failure, and the majority of the data is utilized for training
purposes only. This involves initializing a random forest model, fitting
it with the training data, and using the fitted model to predict the
outcomes of the test data. The results show an accuracy rate of 90%. The
results of this study indicate that the random forest based model
provides a powerful tool for identifying students who may be at risk of
failure and guiding them towards success. Considerably more work will
need to be done to improve the accuracy and efficiency of predicting
student performance using machine learning. This includes incorporating
novel techniques like active learning, transfer learning, and
incorporating student emotions and engagement. Thus, we suggest that to
have more data where we can create three separate datasets for training,
validation and testing to enhance the models’ accuracy and performance.
While this study focused specifically on the random forest classifier,
future studies should conduct a comparative analysis with other widely
used methods such as XGBoost, AdaBoost, neural networks, and others
would provide valuable insights into the performance and effectiveness
of different algorithms in this context.

Supplemental Information

10.7717/peerj-cs.1708/supp-1

Code.

Click here for additional data file.

Additional Information and Declarations

References
