             electronics
Article
Course Success Prediction and Early Identification of At-Risk
Students Using Explainable Artificial Intelligence
Berat Ujkani 1, * , Daniela Minkovska 2                      and Nikolay Hinov 3, *

                                            1   Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Mitrovica “Isa Boletini”,
                                                40000 Mitrovica, Kosovo
                                            2   Department of Programming and Computer Technologies, Technical University of Sofia, 1000 Sofia, Bulgaria;
                                                daniela@tu-sofia.bg
                                            3   Department of Power Electronics, Technical University of Sofia, 1000 Sofia, Bulgaria
                                            *   Correspondence: berat.ujkani@umib.net (B.U.), hinov@tu-sofia.bg (N.H.)


                                            Abstract: Artificial Intelligence (AI) is increasingly used in online education platforms to provide
                                            valuable insights into students’ performance and success. However, the complexity of AI models
                                            makes it challenging for educators to interpret the specific factors that influence whether a student is
                                            going to pass or fail. Utilizing the Open University Learning Analytics Dataset (OULAD), this study
                                            employs various machine learning and deep learning techniques for predicting students’ success,
                                            along with SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) as an Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI)
                                            technique, to understand the key factors behind success or failure. Unlike traditional statistical
                                            methods that explore variable relationships, this AI-driven approach uses advanced deep learning
                                            techniques to identify patterns and insights, allowing for a better understanding of the factors
                                            influencing student success. Additionally, this study focuses on identifying students at risk of failure
                                            using XAI techniques, specifically SHAP, to interpret model outputs by breaking down how specific
                                            factors contribute to a student’s success. This method enables targeted interventions to support
                                            their success. Results reveal that student engagement and registration timelines are critical factors
                                            affecting performance. The customized models achieve up to 94% accuracy for the designed tasks,
                                            outperforming traditional approaches. This study contributes to the use of AI in education and offers
                                            practical insights not only for educators but also for administrators and policymakers to enhance the
Citation: Ujkani, B.; Minkovska, D.;
                                            quality and effectiveness of online learning.
Hinov, N. Course Success Prediction
and Early Identification of At-Risk
                                            Keywords: course success prediction; machine learning; education; explainable artificial intelligence;
Students Using Explainable Artificial
Intelligence. Electronics 2024, 13, 4157.
                                            shap; online learning
https://doi.org/10.3390/
electronics13214157

Academic Editor: Ioannis
                                            1. Introduction
Hatzilygeroudis
                                                  Artificial Intelligence (AI) has already made a strong impact on the way systems work
Received: 23 September 2024                 in our society, spanning fields such as science, health, industry, finance, and media. The
Revised: 17 October 2024                    use of AI in academia has grown significantly, particularly in predicting student academic
Accepted: 21 October 2024                   success [1]. Machine learning algorithms, trained on large datasets containing information
Published: 23 October 2024
                                            about students’ interactions, can accurately assess whether a student is at risk of failing [2].
                                            Such predictions provide timely insights to educators, encouraging them to intervene
                                            and offer support. However, the complex nature of these algorithms often obscures their
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
                                            decision-making processes in a “black box”, making it challenging to understand the
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.          specific reasons behind their predictions [3].
This article is an open access article            To address this limitation, Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) has emerged as
distributed under the terms and             a critical tool [4]. XAI refers to techniques that enhance the transparency of AI models,
conditions of the Creative Commons          allowing educators to understand the factors behind a student’s at-risk prediction and
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://       tailor their interventions to target specific issues [5]. This study applies the XAI method,
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/            SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP), to find the factors influencing a student’s academic
4.0/).                                      outcome that is operationalized in terms of a pass or fail grade.



Electronics 2024, 13, 4157. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics13214157                                     https://www.mdpi.com/journal/electronics
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                             2 of 24



                                  Success in education, in this context, is defined by students achieving passing grades,
                             while failure includes failing grades or course withdrawal. This binary classification aligns
                             with institutional grading systems and provides a practical framework for identifying
                             students in need of support. Moreover, the focus on student success is critical because
                             understanding the underlying factors can lead to more effective interventions and support
                             strategies. Additional explanations will clarify how this study intends to identify at-risk
                             students and provide insights into the complexities of failure behavior, ultimately aiming
                             to enhance student retention and success in online learning environments.
                                  This approach is supported by Tinto’s Student Integration Model [6], which empha-
                             sizes the significance of student engagement and persistence as crucial factors in academic
                             success. Both academic and social integration motivate students toward degree completion.
                             Furthermore, Constructivist Learning Theory [7] reinforces the importance of active student
                             involvement in learning, linking engagement to deeper understanding and success. Our
                             study also focuses on course engagement details, aligning with these theories to support
                             the claim that well-structured academic support enhances student outcomes.
                                  This study addresses the gap between advanced analytics, particularly AI-driven
                             educational data analysis, and practical educational applications. The gap refers to the
                             disconnect between the ability to generate highly accurate predictive models and the
                             challenge of making these models interpretable and actionable for educators. By using
                             XAI methods, we bridge this gap, providing educators with accurate predictions as well as
                             interpretable insights that allow them to take effective action.
                                  The implications of this work extend to educational practices, where targeted interven-
                             tions informed by explainable models can be more effective in preventing student failure.
                             From a policy perspective, this research can guide the development of data-driven strategies
                             for improving student retention and success, emphasizing the role of early identification
                             and support for at-risk students.
                                  The goals of this research are three-fold: (1) predict students’ grades for a course;
                             (2) predict students at risk of failure based on the overall performance; and (3) identify
                             the factors contributing to these predictions. These objectives are interrelated and al-
                             low for a comprehensive understanding of the factors influencing educational success as
                             defined above.
                                  The main contributions of this study are summarized as follows:
                             •    An exploratory data analysis is presented, followed by goal-specific pre-processing of
                                  data for enhanced results.
                             •    Grade prediction for a course is performed by employing various machine learning
                                  techniques, accompanied by a comparative analysis.
                             •    The prediction of at-risk students is presented using both machine learning and deep
                                  learning models.
                             •    The identification of critical factors influencing predictions is executed using the SHAP
                                  method.
                                  This article is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the related work; exploratory
                             data analysis is presented in Section 3; the pre-processing is discussed in Section 4; the
                             methodology is explained in Section 5; Section 6 presents the results; the discussion is
                             included in Section 7; and the conclusion is added in Section 8.

                             2. Related Work
                                   Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) has been a busy research area recently because
                             of its use in identifying the underlying factors behind the model’s predictions [8]. It was
                             employed by researchers in a variety of applications. Researchers leveraged XAI to for a
                             deep understanding of autonomous driving systems [9], while a few of them employed XAI
                             in virtual reality environments for eye-tracking applications [10]. Romano et al. conducted
                             a research study to identify relations between respiratory cancer mortality in Italy, pollution,
                             and socio-economic factors using XAI [11]. Yagin et al. employed XAI to gain insights on
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                               3 of 24



                             reasons to diabetic retinopathy [12]. Carvalho et al. studied the factors behind swimming
                             performance using XAI [13].
                                   The use of XAI in education to explain and predict student performance is relatively
                             new. While AI and machine learning have been employed to predict student success, there
                             is an increasing demand for these models to be understandable as well. People want to
                             know why a model makes certain predictions, not just what the accuracy percentage is. This
                             knowledge is especially important for professionals such as psychologists and researchers
                             who use these models. They prefer simpler models that are easier to understand, even if
                             they are not as complex.
                                   In recent years, the application of machine learning to predict student performance
                             has gained substantial attention in educational data mining, offering valuable insights
                             for improving academic outcomes and institutional strategies. Hussain and Khan [14]
                             explored the use of regression and decision tree classifiers to predict students’ marks
                             and grades using data from the Board of Intermediate and Secondary Education (BISE),
                             highlighting the efficiency of machine learning in forecasting academic performance based
                             on historical student data. Pallathadka et al. expanded on this approach by utilizing a
                             variety of machine learning algorithms, such as Naive Bayes, ID3, C4.5, and SVM, to predict
                             student outcomes and assist educational institutions in reducing failure rates through early
                             intervention [15]. Chen and Zhai further investigated the performance of machine learning
                             models across different types of educational data, comparing the results of random forest,
                             decision tree, and artificial neural networks for both binary and multi-class prediction
                             tasks, with random forest demonstrating superior generality across various datasets [16].
                             These studies collectively underscore the significance of machine learning techniques in
                             forecasting student performance, enabling educational institutions to adopt data-driven
                             strategies to enhance student retention and success.
                                   Mothilal et al. [17] employed the Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations
                             (LIME) method to investigate the reasons linked with students dropping out. The authors
                             used data from the students’ grades in high school subjects such as physics, chemistry,
                             mathematics, and the effort that students put in these subjects to explain dropout rates in
                             the first year of engineering. There was an 84% at-risk prediction of dropping out, and the
                             employed method showed the relation between high school grades and the probability of
                             dropping out in the engineering program. The study, however, lacked a critical analysis
                             of the results with respect to the LIME method and therefore highlights the thorough
                             evaluation of the currently employed method.
                                   A different study [4] stressed the implication of explainability in the field of learning
                             analytics. Another study [2] employed XAI to understand the reasons for students dropping
                             out of a massive open online course (MOOC). The authors showed the week-wise analysis
                             of failure probabilities and explanations. They demonstrated the change in relation between
                             contributing features and the probabilities over time.
                                   It is clear from the above discussion that, while substantial work was made in applying
                             XAI methods to predict student performance and understand the factors influencing
                             student success [18], our study presents a novel approach by leveraging SHAP for in-depth
                             analysis, specifically focused on identifying key predictors of student success in an online
                             education system. The factors considered in this study are measurable predictors of student
                             success, including engagement levels (e.g., time spent on the platform, participation in
                             activities), registration timelines (e.g., how early or late a student registers for a course), and
                             interaction with course materials (e.g., frequency and depth of interaction with learning
                             content). By focusing on these specific factors, we aim to provide actionable insights for
                             improving student support. In terms of student outcomes, this study refers to student
                             learning outcomes, particularly focusing on academic performance (e.g., pass/fail rates)
                             and overall engagement. To further connect the pedagogical and technical aspects of this
                             study, we have drawn upon multiple foundational theories.
                                   To connect the pedagogical and technical aspects of this study, we draw upon several
                             foundational theories. In addition to Social Cognitive Theory [19], which emphasizes the
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                            4 of 24



                             role of self-efficacy, and Bloom’s Taxonomy [20], which organizes learning into hierarchical
                             cognitive levels, Constructivist Learning Theory highlights how students build knowledge
                             through active engagement with course materials [7]. This theory aligns with our findings,
                             which indicate that students who interact more frequently and deeply with learning content
                             tend to perform better academically.
                                  By combining these educational theories with AI-driven models, this study offers a
                             framework that connects advanced technical analytics with practical pedagogical insights.

                             3. Data Selection and Exploratory Analysis
                                 In this section, the dataset is first explained, its structure and features, followed by
                             exploratory analysis.

                             3.1. Dataset
                                  The foundation of this research is a dataset sourced from the Open University Learning
                             Analytics Dataset [21], encompassing data on 32,593 students over a 9-month course period
                             from 2014 to 2015. This dataset includes information related to student demographics,
                             course enrollments, assessment performances, and interactions within the virtual learning
                             environment (VLE). The database has seven tables, namely: studentRegistration, studen-
                             tAssessment, assessments, studentInfo, courses, studentVle, and vle. Every table of the dataset
                             has unique information that can be connected to the facts from other tables by means of
                             identifier fields. There are 32,593 registered students and 22 module presentations in the
                             dataset. The dataset structure is depicted in Figure 1.




                             Figure 1. Dataset structure.

                                  This dataset is from 2015, and several factors justify its continued relevance in the
                             context of student behavior analysis. First, foundational trends in educational engagement
                             have been stable over time, with various studies confirming similar patterns in student be-
                             havior, even as technology and learning environments evolve [22]. Second, the fundamental
                             principles of educational psychology, such as self-efficacy and motivation, remain actual
                             despite changes brought about by events like the pandemic [23]. While we acknowledge
                             the potential changes in student behavior, the dataset used has valuable insights relevant
                             to current educational contexts, facilitating a deeper understanding of the continuity and
                             change in student engagement patterns.

                             3.2. Exploratory Analysis
                                  This section presents the exploratory data analysis. The visualizations of this section
                             provide insights into student performance and engagement patterns.
                                  Figure 2 provides an overview of assessment scores revealing a nuanced picture of
                             academic performance. A substantial concentration of scores corresponds to a range of
                             moderately high to high marks. The presence of peaks around certain score ranges could
                             imply that some assessments have a common level of difficulty, leading to clusters of
                             similar scores.
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                        5 of 24




                             Figure 2. Distribution of assessment scores.

                                  Following the analysis of student assessment scores, attention is put to the types and
                             frequency of assessments conducted across different modules, as illustrated in Figure 3.




                             Figure 3. Type and number of assessments per module.

                                  This analysis shows the composition of assessment types for each module, such as
                             Exam, Tutor-Marked Assessments (TMAs) and Computer-Marked Assessments (CMAs).
                             This chart shows a varied reliance on assessment types across the modules indicating the
                             different learning outcomes that each module aims to measure. For instance, modules with
                             a higher count of CMAs may focus on objective, knowledge-based evaluations, while those
                             with more TMAs might emphasis subjective, skill-based assessments.
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                           6 of 24



                                  Figure 4 shows the outcome of students’ assessment in terms of percentage among
                             four categories, including ‘Pass’, ‘Fail’, ‘Withdrawn’, and ‘Distinction’. The percentage-
                             based approach of this chart allows for an equitable comparison regardless of the size of
                             the student cohort in each module. For example, the module CCC shows a substantial
                             percentage of ‘Distinction’ results. However, it also shows a significant percentage of ‘Fail’
                             results, indicating a polarized outcome where students either performed exceptionally
                             good or very bad. The module GGG has the lowest ‘Fail’ results, suggesting not only
                             high performance but also that the assessments may be well-aligned with the students’
                             capabilities or interests. In contrast, modules AAA, BBB, and FFF show an acceptable
                             percentage of students in each category, which indicates an intermediate difficulty in
                             content and educational methodologies.




                             Figure 4. Percentage of final results by module.

                                  Furthermore, the ‘Withdrawn’ category is significant as it may point to external factors
                             affecting student retention, such as the perceived difficulty of the course material, the
                             level of student engagement required, or even personal circumstances impacting student
                             persistence.
                                  Building on the earlier analysis, Figure 5 illustrates the relationship between assess-
                             ment types and student outcomes. A balanced distribution can be observed in both the
                             CMA and TMA while there is a notable proportion of ‘Withdrawn’ in TMA. This result
                             may indicate the demanding nature of such assessments.




                             Figure 5. Percentage of final results by assessment type.
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                             7 of 24



                                  Age, gender, highest education, and IMD band are significant attributes of the dataset.
                             The percentage performance of students for each of these attributes is illustrated in Figure 6.
                             Interestingly, students aged between 35 and 55 exhibit a more favorable performance, with
                             fewer withdrawals and a higher count of ‘pass’ and ‘distinction’ outcomes, compared to
                             the 0–35 age band.




                             Figure 6. Performance of students measured against different attributes: highest education, IMD
                             band, age and gender.

                                  In terms of gender, there is minimal variation in performance between males and
                             females, with males having a slightly higher representation. The highest educational attain-
                             ment reveals a majority holding A-level qualifications or equivalent. A discernible trend
                             emerges where postgraduate students showcase exemplary performance, characterized by
                             minimal withdrawals and a greater number of ‘distinction’ results. In contrast, individu-
                             als with no formal qualifications, although few, tend to exhibit worse performance, with
                             increased withdrawals and fails.
                                  The IMD band suggests a clear gradient in academic performance in relation to
                             economic deprivation; students from less deprived areas tend to fare better academically,
                             underlining the potential impact of socioeconomic factors on educational outcomes.
                                  The relationship between student engagement, as measured by clicks within the
                             virtual learning environment, and academic performance is illustrated in Figure 7. The
                             chart shows average scores against binned click ranges. Amongst the observed patterns, a
                             salient trend is the initial increase in average scores with higher click counts, indicative of a
                             positive relationship between engagement and performance up to a certain threshold.
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                            8 of 24




                             Figure 7. Average score per click bins.

                             4. Data Preprocessing
                                  This section presents the pre-processing of the dataset. The general steps involve the
                             following:
                             •    Merge and Consolidate: combining relevant tables to achieve a unified presentation.
                             •    Missing Value Handling: filling the missing values with the mode and removing
                                  duplicates.
                             •    Feature Engineering: deriving new attributes and encoding categorical variables to
                                  enrich the dataset for modeling.
                             •    Data Splitting: splitting the dataset among train, validation, and test sets for model
                                  training, optimization, and testing.
                                  In this regard, as mentioned in the Contributions, the pre-processing of the dataset
                             is segregated in two ways, where one is targeted for student grade classification while
                             the other is aimed to be used for the prediction of at-risk students. Both pre-processing
                             strategies are explained in the following subsections.

                             4.1. Data Pre-Processing for Grade Classification
                                  In this sub-section, the pre-processing of the data is explained in a way that is specifi-
                             cally tailored for the goal of course grade prediction.
                                  It is pertinent to mention that, in our study, the Open University Learning Analytics
                             Dataset [21] served as the primary source of raw data, encompassing student engagement
                             metrics, registration details, and various course interactions. The data transformations
                             applied were confined to standard pre-processing techniques, including normalization
                             and missing value imputation, to ensure data uniformity and handle gaps in the dataset.
                             These methods are common in machine learning workflows and are vital for improving
                             model performance without introducing bias. Beyond this pre-processing, no further
                             arbitrary manipulation or modification of the raw data was performed. This decision
                             ensures that the findings generated from our models reflect existing patterns within the
                             original dataset, thus confirming the integrity of the analysis and minimizing the risk of
                             misleading conclusions.
                                  The first critical step in pre-processing involved the merging of tables to consolidate
                             relevant data points into a single dataset. This process involved multiple types of data
                             such as student information and registration, student demographic information, student
                             assessment, and VLE interactions. Following this process, 22 features were engineered.
                                  After the initial data merging and feature engineering, further procedures were ap-
                             plied to refine the dataset for the grade classification task. These procedures involved
                             the handling of missing values, the removal of duplicate entries, the identification and
                             normalization of numerical as well as categorical variables, separating features and target
                             labels, and data splitting in train, validation, and test sets. After performing these pro-
                             cedures, the number of features increased to 68, encompassing both original and newly
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                               9 of 24



                              engineered features. The expanded feature set included both specific identifiers, such
                              as ‘id_student’, and encoded variables, such as ‘code_module_AAA’. The final features,
                              including identifiers, numerical, and categorical features, are as follows:
                                    Identifiers and numerical features: ‘id_student’, ‘num_of_prev_attempts’, ‘studied_credits’,
                             ‘date_registration’, ‘date_unregistration’, ‘id_assessment’, ‘date_submitted’, ‘is_banked’,
                             ‘score’, ‘date’, ‘weight’, ‘total_clicks’, ‘module_presentation_length’.
                                    Encoded categorical features:             course modules (‘code_module_AAA’ to
                             ‘code_module_GGG’), presentation years (‘code_presentation_2013B’ to ‘code_presentation_2014J’),
                              demographic information (gender, region, highest education, IMD band, age band,
                              disability), assessment types, and stratification columns reflecting combinations of age
                              and gender.

                             4.2. Data Pre-Processing for Early Prediction of At-Risk Students
                                  In this sub-section, pre-processing of the data was specifically performed for the goal
                             of early prediction for students who were at-risk of failure. A multi-step process, including
                             data pre-processing and integration, was designed. The details are as follows:
                             1.    Initial filtering of assessments and VLE interactions based on predetermined deadlines
                                   was performed.
                             2.    Subsequently, student demographic and registration information were merged with
                                   academic records, capturing a holistic view of each student’s academic journey. To
                                   maintain the dataset’s relevance, early withdrawn students were filtered out.
                             3.    VLE interaction data were aggregated at the module presentation level. A quantifiable
                                   measure of student engagement was obtained by calculating the number of clicks.
                             4.    The final step involved merging the aggregated VLE data with student assessments
                                   and course details.
                                  After the pre-processing steps, a focused and relevant feature set with a balanced mix
                             of demographic and academic performance indicators was ready.

                             5. Methodology
                                  For performance evaluation, a range of machine learning techniques were used, in-
                             cluding ensemble methods, instance-based learning, and deep learning.

                             5.1. Machine Learning Techniques Used for Course Grade Prediction
                             5.1.1. Random Forest Classifier
                                  Random forest was proposed by Breiman. It involves constructing multiple decision
                             trees during training and predicting the class that is the mode of the individual tree
                             predictions [24]. Equation (1) represents the Gini Index, which is a measure of the impurity
                             or purity used when constructing decision trees in the context of classification problems.
                                                                                      n
                                                              Gini Index = 1 − ∑i=1 ( Pi )2 ,                               (1)

                                  This equation is simplified in a binary classification to

                                                                  = 1 − [( P+ )2 + ( P− )2 ]                                (2)

                                 Here, Pi refers to the proportion of samples that belongs to class i for a particular split,
                             and P+ and P− are the proportion of the positive and negative classes.

                             5.1.2. Gradient Boosting Classifier
                                  Gradient Boosting works by sequentially adding predictors to an ensemble, each one
                             correcting its predecessor [25]. This method effectively reduces bias and variance, making
                             it an effective tool for predictive modeling. Equation (3) describes the learning rate in
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                               10 of 24



                             the context of the Gradient Boosting algorithm, which is a critical component because it
                             dictates the contribution of each new tree added to the model.
                                                                     Sum o f residuals
                                                 γ=                                                                          (3)
                                                      Sum o f each p(1 − p) f or each sample in the lea f

                             5.1.3. k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NNs)
                                  k-NN is based on instance-based learning that classifies new instances based on a
                             similarity measure (e.g., distance functions) [26]. Equation (4) represents Euclidean distance,
                             which is a common distance metric used with the k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN) algorithm.
                                                                             s
                                                                                  n
                                                                d( x, y) =       ∑ ( x1 − y i )2                             (4)
                                                                                 i =1

                             5.1.4. Multi-Layer Perceptron (Neural Network)
                                  The neural network model was inspired by the biological structure of the central
                             nervous system [27]. A multi-layer perceptron consists of at least three layers of nodes: an
                             input layer, a hidden layer, and an output layer. Equation (5) is the representation of a type
                             of feedforward artificial neural network used in an MLP.
                                                                                        n
                                                                   z = w T · x = ∑ wi x i                                    (5)
                                                                                      i =1

                             5.1.5. First Custom Neural Network Architecture
                                   A custom neural network was developed with densely connected layers and was
                             fine-tuned to our dataset. ReLU activation functions in the hidden layers and a sigmoid
                             function at the output layer was used, while an Adam optimizer and binary cross-entropy
                             loss function were used to compile the model. For the sake of reference, it is called the first
                             custom NN model. The summary of the first custom model is shown in Figure 8 (Left).




                             Figure 8. 1st custom model (left); 2nd custom model (center); convolutional neural network (right).
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                         11 of 24



                             5.2. Machine Learning Techniques Used Prediction of At-Risk Students
                                  In this sub-section, a few more machine learning as well as deep learning models are
                             presented, which were developed for predicting students to be at-risk of failure.

                             5.2.1. Second Custom Neural Network Architecture
                                  A second custom NN model was developed for the prediction of students at risk of
                             failure. We call it the second custom model. The model was designed to handle the data
                             in a 1D array format, compiled using the Adam optimizer and sparse categorical cross
                             entropy, making it suitable for our integer-labeled data. The summary of the second custom
                             model is shown in Figure 8 (Center).

                             5.2.2. Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
                                  The CNN model implemented here uses 1D convolutional layers, which are particu-
                             larly useful for extracting features from sequences of data [28]. A dropout layer is used to
                             prevent overfitting and dense layers to interpret the features for binary classification. The
                             model summary of the CNN is shown in Figure 8 (Right).

                             5.2.3. Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
                                   The LSTM model is designed to process sequential data by taking advantage of its
                             memory cells that can maintain information in memory for long periods of time [29]. This
                             model is particularly useful for our time series-like data, allowing the network to remember
                             past data points and use them to influence the output, effectively capturing temporal
                             relationships in the data. The model summary of the LSTM is shown in Figure 9.




                             Figure 9. LSTM model summary.

                             5.2.4. XGBoost
                                  The eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) is based on gradient-boosted decision trees
                             to ensure speed and performance [30]. Equation (6) is a Taylor series expansion, which
                             approximates a function f ( x ) around point a:

                                                                                            1 ′′
                                                    f ( x ) ≈ f ( a) + f ′ ( a)( x − a) +     f ( a)( x − a)2          (6)
                                                                                            2
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                                        12 of 24



                                  This equation is used in the XGBoost to approximate the loss function, which measures
                             the difference between the predicted and actual values.

                             5.3. Model Evaluation Metrics
                                 It is important to ensure that the employed method is performing in a proper way [31].
                             To measure the efficiency and performance of the model, metrics including confusion
                             matrix, accuracy, recall, precision, and F1 metrics are used.

                             5.4. Modeling and Hyper-Parameter Tuning
                                  To enhance the predictive capabilities of the model for course success prediction, a
                             fine-tuning approach was implemented to the best performing models by adjusting the
                             number of layers and filters. The maximum number of epochs was limited to 30. The
                             hyper-parameter tuning applied for custom developed neural network models 1 and 2 are
                             summarized in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.

                             Table 1. Hyper parameters and corresponding accuracy for first custom model.

                                 Number of       Max Number of             Number of                                     Validation
                                                                                                Train Accuracy
                                  Layers             Filters                Epochs                                       Accuracy
                                      2                   32                    10                    85%                   74%
                                      2                   32                    20                    87%                   77%
                                      2                   32                    30                    88%                   76%
                                      3                   64                    10                    92%                   84%
                                      3                   64                    20                    95%                   90%
                                      3                   64                    30                    96%                   89%
                                      4                  128                    10                    93%                   85%
                                      4                  128                    20                    96%                   91%
                                      4                  128                    30                    97%                   93%


                             Table 2. Hyper parameters and corresponding accuracy for second custom model.

                                 Number of       Max Number of             Number of                                     Validation
                                                                                                Train Accuracy
                                  Layers             Filters                Epochs                                       Accuracy
                                      2                   32                    10                    81%                   81%
                                      2                   32                    20                    82%                   81%
                                      2                   32                    30                    83%                   82%
                                      3                   64                    10                    84%                   82%
                                      3                   64                    20                    87%                   83%
                                      3                   64                    30                    89%                   85%
                                      4                  128                    10                    89%                   85%
                                      4                  128                    20                    94%                   88%
                                      4                  128                    30                    96%                   93%


                             5.5. SHAP Method
                                  SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanation) is a technique based on Shapley values [5] that
                             aims to explain the outcomes generated by predictive machine learning models. Its goal is
                             to provide an explanation for a single prediction by determining the contribution of each
                             feature to that prediction. Formally, Shapley values are calculated as follows:

                                                                |S|!(| F | − |S| − 1)! h                           i
                                              ϕi =     ∑                   | F |!
                                                                                         f S∪{i} xS∪{i} − f S ( xS )                  (7)
                                                     S ⊆ F {i }

                             where F is the set of all features, f S∪{i} is the model trained with the subset features, and
                             f S ( xS ) is the model trained without the feature. Essentially, the formula calculates the
                             difference in predictions by comparing the outcomes of training a model with and without
                             a specific feature, considering every possible combination of features [32].
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                           13 of 24



                                  In this study, SHAP is the main method used to understand and explain the developed
                             machine learning model for predicting failures in a VLE. Implementation is conducted
                             using the Python module SHAP (v0.44.1), which provides both global and local inter-
                             pretability. The global level provides insights for all students, while the local level focuses
                             on specific students, treating them as unique cases, to explain the particular reasons be-
                             hind an individual’s decision to fail. Consequently, while the importance of different
                             engagement indicators can be comprehended at the global level, the reasons underlying a
                             particular student’s decision to fail can be explained at the local level.
                                  The SHAP method was applied to the models with the highest predictive performance
                             to interpret the model predictions. This step aimed to accomplish the following:
                             •      Uncover the contribution of each feature to the prediction outcome, providing insights
                                    into the models’ decision-making processes.
                             •      Highlight the factors influencing students’ performance, facilitating a deeper under-
                                    standing of the underlying patterns and trends.
                             •      Offer actionable insights for educational stakeholders by identifying key predictors of
                                    student success and risk factors for failure.
                                 This interpretative approach not only enhances trust in the predictive models but also
                             supports educational interventions by illuminating the pathways through which student
                             engagement and performance can be improved.

                             6. Results
                                  In this section, the prediction results of the machine learning models are presented.
                             The first sub-section presents the results for grade classification task The second sub-section
                             presents the results for at-risk prediction. The third sub-section includes the application
                             of the SHAP method for the identification of important parameters contributing toward
                             successful predictions in the first two sub-sections.

                             6.1. Grade Classification Results
                                  The results of machine learning models for grade classification are presented in
                             this sub-section. Table 3 presents the overall accuracy of models employed for grade
                             classification.

                             Table 3. Accuracy of trained models for grade classification.

                                                   Model                                         Accuracy
                                     First Custom Neural Network Model                              94%
                                            Random Forest Classifier                                84%
                                          Gradient Boosting Classifier                              65%
                                    k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) Classifier                           79%
                                       Multi-layer Perceptron Classifier                            85%


                                   Next, each model’s performance was assessed using other metrics such as precision, re-
                             call, and F1-score where the results of these metrics are included in Tables 4–6, respectively.

                             Table 4. Precision of trained models for grade classification.

                                                First Custom                                     k-Nearest
                                                                                    Gradient                  Multi-Layer
                                                   Neural          Random                        Neighbors
                                 Class\Model                                        Boosting                  Perceptron
                                                  Network           Forest                        (k-NN)
                                                                                    Classifier                 Classifier
                                                   Model                                         Classifier
                                     Fail           0.89             0.89              0.41         0.62         0.55
                                  Withdraw          0.85             0.88              0.48         0.62         0.54
                                     Pass           0.97             0.90              0.79         0.95         0.89
                                  Distinction       0.99             1.0               1.0          0.88         0.99
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                          14 of 24



                             Table 5. Recall of trained models for grade classification.

                                                First Custom                                     k-Nearest
                                                                                    Gradient                  Multi-Layer
                                                   Neural          Random                        Neighbors
                              Class\Model                                           Boosting                  Perceptron
                                                  Network           Forest                        (k-NN)
                                                                                    Classifier                 Classifier
                                                   Model                                         Classifier
                                  Fail              0.95              0.69             0.66         0.93         0.81
                               Withdraw             0.92              0.66             0.66         0.86         0.81
                                  Pass              0.93              0.91             0.59         0.72         0.66
                               Distinction          0.99              0.99             0.99         0.91         0.99


                             Table 6. F1 score of trained models for grade classification.

                                                First Custom                                     k-Nearest
                                                                                    Gradient                  Multi-Layer
                                                   Neural          Random                        Neighbors
                              Class\Model                                           Boosting                  Perceptron
                                                  Network           Forest                        (k-NN)
                                                                                    Classifier                 Classifier
                                                   Model                                         Classifier
                                  Fail              0.92              0.78             0.51         0.74         0.66
                               Withdraw             0.88              0.75             0.56         0.72         0.65
                                  Pass              0.95              0.91             0.67         0.82         0.76
                               Distinction          0.99              0.99             0.99         0.90         0.99


                                   The results in Tables 4–6 reveal that the first custom NN model and random forest
                              showed an overall superior performance over other classifiers in predicting the grades
                              for all the classes. Considering the F-1 score across all classes, the custom NN model
                              outperformed the rest of the models. However, for the ‘distinction’ category, the random
                              forest and gradient boosting classifier showed a similar performance to the NN model.
                             The confusion matrix for the custom NN model is shown in Figure 10 while confusion
                              matrices for the rest of the ML models are shown in Figure 11. The confusion matrices
                              reveal that almost all the machine learning models were confused between ‘withdraw’ and
                             ‘pass’ classes and ended up making a large number of misclassifications for these classes.




                             Figure 10. Confusion matrix result for (first) custom NN.
        Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                                          15 of 24




Electronics 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                          16 of 25




                                             Figure 11. Confusion matrix result of employed ML models.
                                     Figure 11. Confusion matrix result of employed ML models.
                                             6.2. Results for Prediction of At-Risk Students
                                     Table 7. Accuracy of trained models for at-risk classification.
                                                  To perform the prediction of at-risk students, eight ML models were utilized, including
                                             both machine learning and   Model
                                                                             deep learning models. For the prediction of Accuracy
                                                                                                                               ‘at-risk’, the data
                                             were categorized    into two
                                                               Random       categories:
                                                                        Forest          pass and fail. The pass category is
                                                                                Classifier                                   86%considered safe
                                             while the fail category
                                                             Gradientrepresents   at-risk. Both fail and withdrawn categories
                                                                       Boosting Classifier                                   81% are combined
                                             as the fail category for at-risk prediction.
                                                             k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN)    The  employed     models were  trained
                                                                                                                             82% and tested for
                                             each of Multi-layer
                                                      the categories, and  the results were
                                                                  Perceptron (Neural Network)computed     in terms of accuracy,
                                                                                                                             85%precision, recall,
                                             and the F1 score. Table 7 presents the accuracy of the trained models on the test data. The
                                                              Second Custom NN Model                                         93%
                                             precision, recall, and F-1 score are presented in Tables 8–10, respectively.
                                                       Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)                                    86%
                                                          Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)                                      81%
                                             Table 7. Accuracy of trained models for at-risk classification.
                                                                       XGBoost                                               86%
                                                                  Model                                            Accuracy
                                     Table 8. Precision ofRandom
                                                          trained models for at-risk classification.
                                                                  Forest Classifier                                  86%
                                                     Gradient Boosting Classifier                                    81%
                       Random Forest Gradient Boosting                                  Second Cus-
 Class\Model                                         k-Nearest Neighbors
                                                                  k-NN (k-NN) MLP                         CNN        82%
                                                                                                                   LSTM       XGBoost
                         Classifier            ClassifierPerceptron (Neural Network)
                                             Multi-layer                                 tom Model                   85%
      Pass                 0.85                    0.72
                                                      Second Custom0.7
                                                                     NN Model 0.74           0.88          0.78     0.63
                                                                                                                     93%        0.80
      Fail                 0.86               Convolutional
                                                   0.83       Neural Network
                                                                   0.84          (CNN)
                                                                              0.88           0.95          0.87      86%
                                                                                                                    0.84        0.87
                                                 Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)                                       81%
                                                              XGBoost                                                86%
                                 Table 9. Recall of trained models for at-risk classification.

                       Random Forest         Gradient    Boosting
                                                  It is obvious  that the   second  custom Second
                                                                                              modelCus-
                                                                                                     showed  the best performance     with an ac-
 Class\Model                                                           k-NN       MLP                     CNN      LSTM       XGBoost
                         Classifier               Classifier                                tom  Model is to achieve higher efficiency toward
                                             curacy of 93%. Since the purpose of at-risk prediction
      Pass                 0.47                       0.35the ‘fail’ class,
                                             predicting                 0.43in this0.57
                                                                                    context, it0.82        0.56 that
                                                                                                 can be observed     0.44
                                                                                                                        all the 0.53
                                                                                                                               models showed
      Fail                 0.97                       0.96performance0.94
                                             a superior                   for the 0.94          0.97
                                                                                   ‘fail’ class in         0.95to the0.92
                                                                                                   comparison                    0.96 Almost all
                                                                                                                       ‘pass’ class.

                                     Table 10. F1 score of trained models for at-risk classification.

                       Random Forest          Gradient Boosting                            Second Cus-
 Class\Model                                                           k-NN       MLP                     CNN      LSTM       XGBoost
                         Classifier               Classifier                                tom Model
      Pass                 0.61                     0.47                0.54       0.65        0.85        0.65      0.52       0.64
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                                  16 of 24



                                  models achieved an F1 score around or higher than 0.9. Considering the at-risk prediction
                                  performance of the models, precision is the true representation. It can be observed that
                                  only the custom NN model achieved a 90% score for precision and outperformed other
                                  models with a large margin.

                                  Table 8. Precision of trained models for at-risk classification.

                    Random       Gradient                                       Second
 Class\Model         Forest      Boosting         k-NN            MLP           Custom            CNN       LSTM      XGBoost
                    Classifier   Classifier                                     Model
      Pass              0.85       0.72            0.7             0.74           0.88               0.78   0.63          0.80
      Fail              0.86       0.83            0.84            0.88           0.95               0.87   0.84          0.87


                                  Table 9. Recall of trained models for at-risk classification.

                    Random       Gradient                                       Second
 Class\Model         Forest      Boosting         k-NN            MLP           Custom            CNN       LSTM      XGBoost
                    Classifier   Classifier                                     Model
      Pass              0.47       0.35            0.43            0.57           0.82               0.56   0.44          0.53
      Fail              0.97       0.96            0.94            0.94           0.97               0.95   0.92          0.96


                                  Table 10. F1 score of trained models for at-risk classification.

                    Random       Gradient                                       Second
 Class\Model         Forest      Boosting         k-NN            MLP           Custom            CNN       LSTM      XGBoost
                    Classifier   Classifier                                     Model
      Pass              0.61       0.47            0.54            0.65           0.85               0.65   0.52          0.64
      Fail              0.91       0.89            0.89            0.91           0.96               0.91   0.88          0.91


                                      The confusion matrices for the second custom NN model and the LSTM model are
                                  shown in Figure 12.




                                  Figure 12. Confusion matrix result of second custom NN model (left) and LSTM (right).

                                       The confusion matrices for the rest of the models are shown in Figure 13.
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                      17 of 24




                             Figure 13. Confusion matrix result of employed ML and DL models.
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                               18 of 24



                             6.3. SHAP Method Application
                                  Explainable AI is employed utilizing SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) to inter-
                             pret the predictive model’s output. The application and results of the SHAP method are
                             discussed in the following sections individually for grade classification as well as at-risk
                             classification.

                             6.3.1. Grade Classification
                                   For grade classification, the SHAP summary plot provides a meaningful visualization
                             of the feature importance that is determined by the model, as shown in Figure 14. The
                             illustration reveals that ‘Total Clicks’ in the virtual learning environment (VLE) was the
                             most influential feature, with higher interaction levels strongly associated with increased
                             probabilities of classifying a student as likely to succeed. Conversely, ‘date unregistra-
                             tion’ was a significant negative predictor, where an unregistration event could suggest a
                             decreased likelihood of course completion, thereby predicting failure.




                             Figure 14. SHAP summary plot for grade classification [Class 2: Distinction; Class 1: Fail; Class 0:
                             Pass; Class 3: Withdrawn].

                                   The number of previous attempts was particularly impactful for one of the classes,
                             indicating that students who repeatedly attempt courses may be more easily classified into
                             this specific category.
                                   Module-specific features (‘Code_Module_FFF’, ‘Code_Module_BBB’, ‘Code_Module_DDD’)
                             and temporal features (‘Code_Presentation_2013J’, ‘Code_Presentation_2014J’) suggest that cer-
                             tain modules and the years in which they were taken could influence student outcomes,
                             reflecting, perhaps, the varying difficulty of modules or the different dynamics of student
                             cohorts over time.
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                         19 of 24



                                  Demographic features, including ‘Region_London Region’ and socio-economic in-
                             dicators like ‘IMD_Band_20–30%’ and ‘IMD_Band_30–40%’, also surfaced as important
                             factors. The level of education prior to the course, such as ‘Highest_Education_A Level or
                             Equivalent’ and ‘Highest_Education_Lower than A Level’, was indicative of the model’s
                             consideration of a student’s background in its predictions.

                             Feature Importance
                                   Figure 15 illustrates the permutation feature importance derived from the grade classi-
                             fication model ranking the influence of various features on the model’s output. The “Total
                             Clicks” feature has the highest importance score, suggesting that the student engaging with
                             the material receives the highest scores. Following in significance is the ‘id_assessment’
                             feature; each assignment has a different average score, which is why assignment ID is
                             important. And when a student enrolls in courses with assignments that people normally
                             do not receive good scores on, it increases the student’s chances to fail.




                             Figure 15. Permutation feature importance.
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                        20 of 24



                                  The waterfall chart shown in Figure 16 provides representations of SHAP values for
                             an instance within the dataset, illustrating the contribution of each feature to the model’s
                             prediction. As shown, the ‘id_assessment’ feature significantly decreases the model’s
                             output, while ‘total_clicks’ also decreases it but to a lesser extent.




                             Figure 16. SHAP values for the first instance.

                                  The waterfall chart shown in Figure 17 provides representations of SHAP values for a
                             second instance. Different sets of features influence the model’s prediction: ‘total_clicks’
                             greatly decreases the prediction value, whereas ‘code_module_FFF’, ‘region_East Midlands
                             Region’, and ‘imd_band_90–100%’ have minor negative contributions.




                             Figure 17. SHAP values for the second instance.
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                             21 of 24



                             6.3.2. Prediction of At-Risk Category
                                  Employing the SHAP method for at-risk prediction results, the ‘Total Clicks’ feature
                             once again stands out as having a significant positive impact on the model’s output,
                             indicating that student engagement with the online learning platform is a strong predictor
                             of academic success, as shown in Figure 18. The feature ‘date_registration’ also appears to
                             be important, suggesting that the date when students register can influence their success,
                             potentially capturing early commitment to their studies.




                             Figure 18. SHAP summary plot for at-risk classification [Class 1: Pass, Class 0: Fail].

                                  Regional features such as ‘Region_Scotland’ and ‘Region_South West Region’ show
                             varying impacts on the model’s output for different classes, which could reflect regional
                             differences in educational outcomes or support services available to students.
                                  The ‘ID Assessment’ and ‘Score’ features are, as expected, strong predictors, directly
                             tied to student performance on assessments. Socio-economic factors, represented by
                             ‘IMD_Band_50–60%’ and ‘IMD_Band_40–50%’, also play a role, particularly in predicting
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                          22 of 24



                             Class 0, which may correlate with more challenging socio-economic circumstances affecting
                             student performance.
                                  Academic workload, captured by ‘Studied_Credits’, and course characteristics, such
                             as ‘Code_Presentation_2014B’, ‘Module_Presentation_Length’, and ‘Code_Module_EEE’,
                             are informative features that the model uses to discern patterns in student success.
                                  Finally, the level of education prior to the course, ‘Highest_Education_Lower than A
                             Level’ influences the model’s predictions, potentially reflecting the impact of a student’s
                             educational background on their ability to succeed in higher education.

                             7. Discussions
                                   The aim of this study is to unveil the factors affecting students’ performance within
                             an online learning environment. Initially, the data exploration section provides useful
                             insights of the data and explains the relation between the virtual learning environment
                             and the student specifics. Several indicators, including demographic data, prior education,
                             financial limitations, were identified as key factors linked with the student outcome.
                                   The dataset details and pre-processing steps show the complexities and noise within
                             the data. The pre-processing is extremely important to refine the data and to improve the
                             class representation. Separate pre-processing is performed for the grade classification task
                             and for the at-risk prediction task. Task-specific data consolidation is performed, which
                             ensures the enhanced performance of machine learning algorithms in the next stages.
                                   A number of machine learning classifiers were employed for the classification of grades
                             for students. A custom shallow architecture of a multi-layer perceptron outperformed the
                             rest of the algorithms, achieving 94% accuracy. For the at-risk prediction of student, again,
                             the custom developed neural network model the achieved highest accuracy of 94%. Hence,
                             a customized neural network model proved to be the best choice among others, even in
                             comparison with deep learning models such as the CNN and LSTM. Considering the recall
                             and F1 score, other models such as random forest showed a similar performance to the
                             custom ANN model; however, the ANN outperformed when it was about precision. The
                             differential performance across models underscores the importance of model selection for
                             specific datasets at hand.
                                   The SHAP method identified key factors significantly influencing student performance,
                             specifically total clicks in the virtual learning environment and timely registration emerged
                             as critical indicators related to students’ performance. The monitoring of these indicators
                             and timely intervention will significantly enhance the success probability for students
                             in an online learning environment. These findings suggest that educational institutions
                             can greatly benefit from devising strategies aimed at increasing student engagement and
                             providing additional support for those registering closer to course commencement.
                                   While the primary dataset used in this study is from a pre-pandemic period, it is impor-
                             tant to acknowledge the broader context of how the COVID-19 pandemic may have altered
                             students’ habits, motivations, and learning behaviors. Several studies highlighted the
                             shifts in student engagement and learning modalities as a result of the pandemic [23,33,34],
                             indicating that students may now engage differently with online learning platforms com-
                             pared to the pre-pandemic period. As this study uses pre-pandemic data, any conclusions
                             drawn may not fully capture these post-pandemic changes. Therefore, future research
                             could investigate whether the identified key factors remain as critical in post-pandemic
                             learning environments.
                                   Looking ahead, there exists a rich landscape for future research to further refine and
                             enhance the predictive capabilities of models in educational settings. Longitudinal studies
                             could provide deeper insights into the persistence of identified predictive factors over
                             time, while the integration of qualitative data could enrich the understanding of student
                             experiences and motivations.
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                                      23 of 24



                                  8. Conclusions
                                        This study illuminated the potential of predictive analytics within online learning
                                  environments targeted for enhancing student success. By testing a variety of predictive
                                  models, key factors that influence academic success were identified. This study provides
                                  valuable insights into the parameters identified as the most relevant for predicting student
                                  performance, highlighting their implications for educational practices and interventions.
                                  These results can be utilized to inform targeted intervention strategies and enhance curricu-
                                  lar design by providing educators with data-driven insights into the factors most influential
                                  on student success, enabling more personalized and effective support for at-risk students
                                  of failure.
                                        These findings underscore the importance of personalized interventions and targeted
                                  support strategies to foster student engagement and address potential challenges early
                                  on, ultimately aiming to prevent failure. The findings of this study also have practical
                                  implications for policymakers who can use these insights to guide decisions regarding
                                  resource allocation in online learning platforms, particularly by prioritizing initiatives that
                                  increase student engagement and timely course registration.
                                        This research offers valuable insights into predicting student performance and iden-
                                  tifying at-risk students. However, it is worth noting that the habits and motivations of
                                  students may have shifted due to the pandemic, which could alter the conclusions drawn
                                  from this study. Future work should consider how post-pandemic changes in student
                                  behavior might impact the effectiveness of AI-driven interventions.

                                  Author Contributions: B.U., D.M. and N.H. were involved in the full process of producing this paper,
                                  including the conceptualization, methodology, modeling, validation, visualization, and preparation
                                  of the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
                                  Funding: This study was financed by the European Union—NextGenerationEU, through the National
                                  Recovery and Resilience Plan of the Republic of Bulgaria, project № BG-RRP-2.004-0005.
                                  Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was exempted by the Institute Board of the Faculty
                                  of Mechanical and Computer Engineering. All subjects gave their informed consent for inclusion
                                  before participating in the study. No study ethics approval is required for this type.
                                  Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the
                                  study.
                                  Data Availability Statement: The data used in this research are available at https://analyse.kmi.
                                  open.ac.uk/open_dataset (accessed on 12 May 2024).
                                  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
1.    Tseng, S.F.; Tsao, Y.W.; Yu, L.C.; Chan, C.L.; Lai, K.R. Who will pass? Analyzing learner behaviors in MOOCs. Res. Pract. Technol.
      Enhanc. Learn. 2016, 11, 8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.    Gardner, J.; Brooks, C. Student success prediction in MOOCs. User Model. User-Adapt. Interact. 2018, 28, 127–203. [CrossRef]
3.    Khosravi, H.; Shum, S.B.; Chen, G.; Conati, C.; Tsai, Y.S.; Kay, J.; Knight, S.; Martinez-Maldonado, R.; Sadiq, S.; Gašević, D.
      Explainable artificial intelligence. Artif. Intell. Comput. Educ. 2022, 3, 100074. [CrossRef]
4.    Shabaninejad, S.; Khosravi, H.; Abdi, S.; Indulska, M.; Sadiq, S. Incorporating explainable learning analytics to assist educators
      with identifying students in need of attention. In Proceedings of the Ninth ACM Conference on Learning@Scale, Roosevelt Island,
      NY, USA, 1–3 June 2022; pp. 384–388.
5.    De Laet, T.; Mothilal, R.K.; Broos, T.; Pinxten, M. Predicting First-year engineering student success: From traditional statistics
      to machine learning. In Proceedings of the 46th SEFI Annual Conference 2018, Copenhagen, Denmark, 17–21 September 2018;
      Volume 46, pp. 322–329.
6.    Tinto, V. Dropout from Higher Education: A Theoretical Synthesis of Recent Research. Rev. Educ. Res. 1975, 45, 89–125. [CrossRef]
7.    Dagar, Y.A. Constructivism: A Paradigm for Teaching and Learning. Arts Soc. Sci. J. 2016, 7, 1–4. [CrossRef]
8.    Hassija, V.; Chamola, V.; Mahapatra, A.; Singal, A.; Goel, D.; Huang, K.; Scardapane, S.; Spinelli, I.; Mahmud, M.; Hussain, A.
      Interpreting black-box models: A review on explainable artificial intelligence. Cogn. Comput. 2024, 16, 45–74. [CrossRef]
9.    Atakishiyev, S.; Salameh, M.; Yao, H.; Goebel, R. Explainable artificial intelligence for autonomous driving: A comprehensive
      overview and field guide for future research directions. IEEE Access 2024, 12, 101603–101625. [CrossRef]
Electronics 2024, 13, 4157                                                                                                      24 of 24



10.   Bekler, M.; Yilmaz, M.; Ilgın, H.E. Assessing Feature Importance in Eye-Tracking Data within Virtual Reality Using Explainable
      Artificial Intelligence Techniques. Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 6042. [CrossRef]
11.   Romano, D.; Novielli, P.; Diacono, D.; Cilli, R.; Pantaleo, E.; Amoroso, N.; Tangaro, S. Insights from Explainable Artificial
      Intelligence of Pollution and Socioeconomic Influences for Respiratory Cancer Mortality in Italy. J. Pers. Med. 2024, 14, 430.
      [CrossRef]
12.   Yagin, F.H.; Colak, C.; Algarni, A.; Gormez, Y.; Guldogan, E.; Ardigò, L.P. Hybrid Explainable Artificial Intelligence Models for
      Targeted Metabolomics Analysis of Diabetic Retinopathy. Diagnostics 2024, 14, 1364. [CrossRef]
13.   Carvalho, D.D.; Goethel, M.F.; Silva, A.J.; Vilas-Boas, J.P.; Pyne, D.B.; Fernandes, R.J. Swimming Performance Interpreted through
      Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI)—Practical Tests and Training Variables Modelling. Appl. Sci. 2024, 14, 5218. [CrossRef]
14.   Hussain, S.; Khan, M.Q. Student-performulator: Predicting students’ academic performance at secondary and Intermediate level
      using machine learning. Ann. Data Sci. 2023, 10, 637–655. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.   Pallathadka, H.; Wenda, A.; Ramirez-Asís, E.; Asís-López, M.; Flores-Albornoz, J.; Phasinam, K. Classification and prediction of
      student performance data using various machine learning algorithms. Mater. Today Proc. 2023, 80, 3782–3785. [CrossRef]
16.   Chen, Y.; Zhai, L. A comparative study on student performance prediction using machine learning. Educ. Inf. Technol. 2023, 28,
      12039–12057. [CrossRef]
17.   Hooda, M.; Rana, C.; Dahiya, O.; Shet, J.P.; Singh, B.K. Integrating LA and EDM for improving students Success in higher
      Education using FCN algorithm. Math. Probl. Eng. 2022, 2022, 7690103. [CrossRef]
18.   Shapley, L.S. 17. A Value for n-Person Games. In Contributions to the Theory of Games (AM-28); Kuhn, H.W., Tucker, A.W., Eds.;
      Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, USA, 1953; Volume II, pp. 307–318. [CrossRef]
19.   Schunk, D.H. Social cognitive theory. In APA Educational Psychology Handbook, Vol 1: Theories, Constructs, and Critical Issues;
      American Psychological Association: Washington, DC, USA, 2012; Volume 1, pp. 101–123.
20.   Adams, N.E. Bloom’s Taxonomy of Cognitive Learning Objectives. J. Med. Libr. Assoc. JMLA 2015, 103, 152–153. [CrossRef]
      [PubMed]
21.   Kuzilek, J.; Hlosta, M.; Zdrahal, Z. Open University Learning Analytics dataset. Sci. Data 2017, 4, 170171. [CrossRef]
22.   Butucha, K.G. Emerging Trends in Student Engagement in the 21St Century Contemporary World. Baraton Interdiscip. Res. J. 2016,
      6, 39–43.
23.   Tartavulea, C.V.; Albu, C.N.; Albu, N.; Dieaconescu, R.I.; Petre, S. Online Teaching Practices and the Effectiveness of the
      Educa-tional Process in the Wake of the COVID-19 Pandemic. Amfiteatru Econ. 2020, 22, 920.
24.   Breiman, L. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 2001, 45, 5–32. [CrossRef]
25.   Friedman, J.H. Greedy function approximation: A gradient boosting machine. Ann. Stat. 2001, 29, 1189–1232. [CrossRef]
26.   Keller, J.M.; Gray, M.R.; Givens, J.A. A fuzzy k-nearest neighbor algorithm. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 1985, SMC-15, 580–585.
      [CrossRef]
27.   Shanmuganathan, S. Artificial Neural Network Modelling: An Introduction; Springer International Publishing: Berlin/Heidelberg,
      Germany, 2016; pp. 1–14.
28.   O’Shea, K. An introduction to convolutional neural networks. arXiv 2015, arXiv:1511.08458.
29.   Hochreiter, S. Long Short-term Memory. In Neural Comput; MIT-Press: Cambridge, UK, 1997.
30.   Chen, T.; Guestrin, C. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference
      on knowledge discovery and data mining, San Francisco, CA, USA, 13–17 August 2016; pp. 785–794.
31.   Cohen, S. The evolution of machine learning: Past, present, and future. In Artificial Intelligence and Deep Learning in Pathology;
      Elsevier: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2021; pp. 1–12.
32.   Lundberg, S. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. arXiv 2017, arXiv:1705.07874.
33.   Lim, K.K.; Lee, C.S. Investigating Learner’s Online Learning Behavioural Changes during the COVID-19 Pandemic. Proc. Assoc.
      Inf. Sci. Technol. 2021, 58, 777–779. [CrossRef]
34.   Jereb, E.; Jerebic, J.; Urh, M. Studying Habits in Higher Education Before and After the Outbreak of the COVID-19 Pandemic.
      Athens J. Educ. 2023, 10, 67–84. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
